♪
>> THE CINEMATIC MUSICAL, IF YOU
LOOK AT THE DNA, THERE’S ALWAYS
A KIND OF CODE OR A LANGUAGE
THAT’S SPECIFIC TO THE TIME
THEY’RE IN.
♪ WHEN YOU’RE A JET YOU’RE A JET
ALL THE WAY FROM YOUR FIRST
CIGARETTE TO YOUR LAST DIEING
DAY ♪
>> WEST SIDE STORY IS
SHAKESPEARE IN THE STREETS OF
NEW YORK.
IT HAS A CODE THAT WAS BOTH OLD
AND COMPLETELY NEW.
♪
>> WITH "WEST SIDE STORY," THE
MUSIC HAS THIS KIND OF JAZZ
INFLUENCE, DISCORD ANT ASPECT.
YOU CAN FEEL IT.
IT’S LIKE SPARKING IN THE AIR.
♪
AND THE MOVES ARE VERY ANGULAR
AND SORT OF ALMOST
ARCHITECTURAL.
>> "WEST SIDE STORY" WAS A BIG
BROADWAY HIT CREATED BY ARTHUR
LAWRENCE AND STEPHEN SONDHEIM
AND LEONARD BERNSTEIN, WHO WERE
SOME OF THE GREATEST MUSICAL
GENIUSES WORKING AT THE TIME.
>> THEY ACTUALLY ENLISTED JEROME
ROBBINS, WHO CREATED THE
CHOREOGRAPHY AND DIRECTED THE
ORIGINAL BROADWAY PRODUCTION TO
DIRECT THIS FILM ALONG WITH
ROBERT WISE.
>> EVERYBODY WAS TRANSPORTED BY
"WEST SIDE STORY."
IT WAS WILDLY ROMANTIC.
IT WAS THE ROMEO AND JULIET
STORY, BUT TOLD WITH SUCH
URGENCY.
>> COME DOWN.
>> NO.
>> MARIA.
>> IT HAD TREMENDOUS IMPACT.
>> WITH THIS RIVALRY, IT REALLY
REFLECTS AMERICA AND DEALS WITH
ISSUES THAT ARE STILL RELEVANT
TODAY.
♪ LIFE CAN BE BRIGHT IN
AMERICA ♪
♪ IF YOU CAN FIGHT IN AMERICA ♪
♪ LIFE IS ALL RIGHT IN AMERICA ♪
♪ IF YOU’RE ALL WHITE IN
AMERICA ♪
>> YOU THINK YOU’RE GOING AFTER
THE AMERICAN DREAM, BUT THE
AMERICAN DREAM IS CLEARLY NOT
ACCEPTING YOU.
THAT’S REALLY WHAT’S BEING
TALKED ABOUT IN THAT MOMENT IN
"WEST SIDE STORY"
♪ LOTS OF NEW HOUSING WITH MORE
SPACE ♪
♪ LOTS OF DOORS SLAMMING IN OUR
FACE
♪ I’LL GET AN APARTMENT ♪
♪ BETTER GET RID OF YOUR
ACCENT ♪
>> "WEST SIDE STORY" REALLY
SHOWED 9
SHOWED THE WORLD IF YOU CAST
PEOPLE FROM THEIR OWN CULTURE,
IT’S GOING TO MAKE AN IMPACT WHO
WINS THE OSCAR, RITA MORENO.
>> RITA MORENO IN WEST"WEST SIDE
STORY."
>> SHE STANDS OUT BECAUSE OF
THAT.
>> I CAN’T BELIEVE IT.
>> "WEST SIDE STORY" JUST
COINCIDED WITH HOLLYWOOD’S
ATTEMPT TO DO SOMETHING BIG,
SPLASHY, AND TECHNICOLOR IN THE
MOVIES TO FIGHT BACK AGAINST
TELEVISION.
>> IN THE 60s, THE STUDIOS WERE
STAGGERING FROM PEOPLE NOT GOING
TO THE THEATERS.
IT’S JUST HARD TO COMPETE WITH
FREE STUFF IN YOUR LIVING ROOM.
>> AT THE TIME, TELEVISION IS
GOING GANGBUSTERS, SO THE MOVIES
ARE CHANGING.
THEY’RE TRYING TO DO
COUNTERPROGRAMMING.
IT’S LIKE IF TELEVISION IS GOING
TO DO WHAT WE USED TO DO, THEN
WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING NEW.
SO WE SEE THE BIG EPIC
BLOCKBUSTER FILMS.
>> IN NEW YORK, THE WORLD
PREMIERE OF "PART SPARTACUS.
KIRK DOUGLAS ARRIVES WITH HIS
WIFE AT THE OPENING.
>> SPARTACUS CAME RIGHT AT THE
TOP OF 1960sS.
THIS WAS A BIG ROADSHOW, RESERVE
SEAT MOVIE WITH KIRK DOUGLAS.
>> THOSE WHO ARE ABOUT TO DIE
SALUTE YOU.
>> SPARTACUS IS A REVOLUTIONARY
MOVIE ABOUT REVOLUTIONARIES.
IT’S THE STORY OF A SLAVE
REBELLION IN ROME, AND KIRK
DOUGLAS IS THE LEADER OF THAT
REBELLION.
>> SHE’S GOING TO ROME.
SHE’S BEEN SOLD.
>> SHE’S BEEN SOLD?
>> NO TALKING IN THE KITCHEN,
SLAVE.
>> SPARTACUS REALLY MIRRORED THE
SITUATION BEHIND THE SCENES
BECAUSE DALTON TRUMBO, ITS
SCREENWRITER, HAD BEEN
BLACKLISTED, HAD NOT BEEN ABLE
TO USE HIS NAME ON MOVIES FOR
YEARS.
>> ARE YOU OR HAVE YOU EVER BEEN
A MEMBER OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY?
>> I BELIEVE I HAVE THE RIGHT TO
BE CONFRONTED WITH ANY EVIDENCE
WHICH SUPPORTS THIS QUESTION.
I SHOULD LIKE TO SEE WHAT YOU
HAVE.
>> OH, YOU WOULD?
>> YES.
>> WELL, YOU WILL PRETTY SOON.
[ LAUGHTER ]
>> KIRK DOUGLAS FAMOUSLY BROKE
THE BLACKLIST WITH SPARTACUS,
SAID YOU WILL SEE SCREENPLAY BY
DALTON TRUMBO ON THOSE CREDITS,
AND THE VERY FAMOUS SCENE IN THE
MOVIE WHERE THEY’RE AFTER
SPARTACUS AND THEY’RE SAYING,
WHERE IS SPARTACUS, AND
EVERYBODY STANDS UP?
>> I’M SPARTACUS.
>> THAT IS A VERY MOVIEING
SCENE, ESPECIALLY IF YOU KNOW
TRUMBO’S HISTORY.
>> I’M SPARTACUS.
>> IT WAS A SCARY, DARK PERIOD
FOR HOLLYWOOD THAT WAS LIFTED
RIGHT AS WE GOT INTO THE 60s.
♪
>> LAWRENCE OF ARABIA IS THE
MOVIE THAT REALLY MADE ME WANT
TO BE A MOVIE MAKER.
IT’S SWEEPING VISTAS OF
TREMENDOUS PRODUCTION VALUE,
SAND DUNES AND PERFECT LIGHTING
CONDITIONS, AND THESE AMAZING
INTIMATE CLOSE‐UPS.
IT’S A STORY ABOUT A MAN WHO
GETS HIMSELF INVOLVED IN THESE
AFFAIRS BETWEEN ALL THE TRIBES
OF THE MIDDLE EAST.
>> THE ENGLISH GOPHER, THEY
STRIKE WHERE THEY PLEASE AND
THIS MAKES THEM GREAT.
>> MR. LAWRENCE, THAT WILL DO.
IT’S NOT YOUR MILITARY ADVICE.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO HEAR HIS
OPINION.
>> DAMN YOU, LAWRENCE.
WHO DO YOU TAKE ORDERS FROM?
>> T.E. LAWRENCE WAS BRITISH,
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND, HE
BECOMES A KIND OF CONVERT TO THE
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENT IN THE
MIDDLE EAST.
>> LAWRENCE GOES ON THIS
ENORMOUS JOURNEY AND ADVENTURE
IN TRYING TO HELP THE BED OU WIN
AGAINST THE TURKS AND WANTS TO
DEFEND THEIR RIGHTS.
>> WHERE DO YOU BEGIN WITH AN
EPIC LIKE LAWRENCE?
>> A BLANK SHEET OF PAPER AS
WITH EVERYTHING.
YOU KNOW, YOU READ EVERYTHING
YOU CAN GET YOUR HANDS ON, TALK
TO PEOPLE WHO KNEW THIS
PARTICULAR CHARACTER.
THEN I THINK THE ONLY THING TO
DO IS TO THROW IT ALL AWAY AND
DO HIM AS YOU SEE HIM.
>> WHO ARE YOU?
THAT IS CENTRAL QUESTION OF THE
WHOLE MOVIE, AND LAWRENCE DOES
NOT KNOW THE ANSWER TO THAT
QUESTION.
>> HERE’S O’TOOLE, WHO IS GIVEN
THIS OPPORTUNITY, AND HE JUST ‐‐
HE GOES ALL THE WAY.
AND THE WAY HE PLAYED IT, YOU
KNOW, WITH HIS PHYSICALITY, HE
GIVES ONE OF THE GREATEST
PERFORMER I’VE EVER SEEN BY AN
ACTOR IN MY LIFE.
>> THAT MOMENT, SOMETHING VERY
IMPORTANT CLICKED, WHICH WAS
THIS.
AND THE EYES DIDN’T TRAVEL OVER
THE CLOTHES, BUT THEY WERE AWARE
OF THE HANDS AND AWARE OF
EVERYTHING THAT WAS GOING ON,
AND IT WAS AT ONCE WITHDRAWN AS
A BOXER MUST BE, AND AT THE SAME
TIME VERY PENETRATING.
AND THIS ONE PHYSICAL THING
REALLY CLICKED, AND IT MADE A
WHOLE DIFFERENCE TO THE WAY I
PLAYED IT.
>> WITH LAWRENCE, YOU HAVE THIS
SPECIAL THING, AN INTIMATE EPIC.
>> DO YOU THINK I’M JUST
ANYBODY, ALI?
DO YOU?
>> AND IT’S AN INCREDIBLY
DETAILED CHARACTER STUDY IN ONE
OF THE BIGGEST MOVIES EVER MADE.
>>> SO I THINK A MAN IN HIS
POSITION WILL TAKE ME TO EL
MOROCCO, MAYBE 21.
INSTEAD HE TAKES ME TO HAMBURGER
HEAVEN AND SOME APARTMENT.
>> THE APARTMENT IS A WATERSHED
MOVIE.
IT IS NOT ONLY ONE OF THE
GREATEST FILMS EVER MADE, BUT
FOR 1960, IT’S VERY DIFFICULT
SUBJECT MATTER BECAUSE IT’S
ABOUT EXTRAMARITAL AFFAIRS.
>> THE APARTMENT IS ABOUT A NEW
YORK CLERK NAMED C. C. BAXTER WHO
IS TRYING TO GET BACK ON THE
CORPORATE LADDER.
SO HE AGREES TO LEND HIS
APARTMENT OUT TO EXECUTIVES FOR
THEIR AFFAIRS.
>> I HAVE SOMETHING I THINK
BELONGS TO YOU.
I MEAN THE YOUNG LADY WHOEVER
SHE MAY BE.
IT WAS ON MY COUCH WHEN I GOT
BACK LAST NIGHT.
>> THANKS.
>> THE MIRROR IS BROKEN.
IT WAS BROKEN WHEN I FOUND IT.
>> ALL OF IT COMES CRASHING DOWN
WHEN HE REALIZES THE GIRL HE’S
FALLEN FOR, THE EL VATDEVATOR
OPERATOR, PLAYED BY SHIRLEY
MacLAINE, THAT SHE IS ONE OF THE
GIRLS THAT’S GOING UP TO HIS
APARTMENT AND HAVING AN AFFAIR
WITH ONE OF THE BOSSES.
>> YOU DON’T THINK IT’S TOO
LITTLE TOO MUCH.
AFTER ALL, THIS IS A
CONSERVATIVE FIRM.
I DON’T WANT PEOPLE TO THINK I’M
AN ENTERTAINER.
>> WHEN HE LOOKS IN THE MIRROR,
HE REALIZES IT’S THE SAME MIRROR
THAT HE’S SEEN INSIDE HIS
APARTMENT.
>> THE MIRROR, IT’S BROKEN.
>> YES, I KNOW.
I LIKE IT THAT WAY.
IT MAKES ME LOOK THE WAY I FEEL.
>> "THE APARTMENT" WAS THE
DEEPEST ROMANTIC COMEDY MAYBE
EVER MADE.
>> MISS KUBILIK?
>> AT THE HEART OF IT IS WHAT IT
IS TO BE HUMAN.
>> DID YOU HEAR WHAT I SAID?
I ABSOLUTELY ADORE YOU.
>> SHUT UP AND DEAL.
>> MY LOVE OF THE APARTMENT
SPILLED INTO THE WRITING OF
JEREMY MAGUIRE, AND THERE WOULD
NOT BE JERRY MAGUIRE IF IT
WEREN’T FOR "THE APARTMENT."
♪
>> BREAKFAST AT TIFFANY’S IS THE
ICONIC AUDREY HEPBURN ROLE.
WHEN YOU HEAR THE TITLE, YOU
INSTANTLY IMAGINE HER IN THE
LITTLE BLACK DRESS WITH THE
PEARLS, WITH THE PERFECT UP‐DO,
AND SHE’S THIS TRAGIC, FLAWED
FIGURE.
>> WHAT HAPPENED TO YOU, ANYWAY?
YOU TAKE OFF FOR THE POWDER
ROOM, AND THAT’S THE LAST I SEE
YOU.
>> NOW, REALLY, HARRY ‐‐
>> HARRY WAS THE OTHER GUY.
I’M SID.
>> BREAKFAST AT TIFFANY’S, LIKE
THE APARTMENT, IS A MOVIE ABOUT
PEOPLE WHO ARE SORT OF WILLING
TO SELL THEIR SOULS.
>> 300?
SHE’S VERY GENEROUS.
>> AND REALIZING AT WHAT POINT
THEY’RE NOT GOING TO DO THAT
ANYMORE.
>> I WAS JUST TRYING TO LET YOU
KNOW I UNDERSTAND.
I UNDERSTAND COMPLETELY.
>> AUDREY HEPBURN IS JUST THIS
LIGHT.
HER SUBTLETIES WERE ASTOUNDING
TO ME.
>> FRED DARLING, I’M SO GLAD YOU
COULD COME.
>> JUST THE WAY THAT SHE SPOKE
AND THE WAY SHE WAS ALWAYS
ELEGANTLY SELF‐DEPRECATING.
>> I’M TRYING TO SAVE, BUT I’M
NOT VERY GOOD AT IT.
>> THERE’S NOT A BAD AUDREY
HEPBURN FILM.
THERE JUST ISN’T.
♪ TWO DRIFTERS OFF TO SEE THE
WORLD ♪
>> IN MOON RIVER, AUDREY HEPBURN
IS SITTING ON THE FIRE ESCAPE
AND SINGING IT IN THIS VERY
TENDER WAY, AND YOU FEEL SHE’S
SORT OF THIS LOST SOUL, TRYING
TO GRAPPLE ABOUT WHO SHE IS IN
THE WORLD.
♪ MOON RIVER AND ME ♪
>> WHAT WAS AMAZING ABOUT AUDREY
WAS SHE WAS VERY FRAGILE IN
LIFE, SMOKED TOO MUCH, INSECURE.
AND WHEN SHE GOT IN FRONT OF THE
CAMERA, SOMETHING HAPPENED.
ALL THAT FRAGILITY, SENSITIVITY,
SHE KIND OF MARSHALLED IT AND
BECAME VERY STRONG.
>> YOU THINK YOU OWN ME?
>> THAT’S EXACTLY WHAT I THINK.
>> I KNOW THAT’S WHAT EVERYBODY
ALWAYS THINKS BUT EVERYBODY
HAPPENS TO BE WRONG.
>> I AM NOT EVERYBODY.
>> WHEN WE THINK OF CLASSIC
HOLLYWOOD, WE THINK OF ROMANCE
AND GLAMOUR.
THAT BEGINS TO BREAK DOWN IN THE
60s, AND WE START TO GET A MORE
COMPLEX VIEW OF HUMAN
PSYCHOLOGY.
>> NOW, THEN, COMRADE ‐‐
>> MAY I PRE‐SENT THE FAMOUS
RAYMOND SHAW.
>> A YOUNG MAN YOU’VE FLOWN
8,000 MILES TO THIS DREARY SPOT
IN MANCHURIA TO SEE.
>> THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE IS
ABOUT A BRAINWASHED SOLDIER WHO
IS THE STEPSON OF AN IMPORTANT
SENATOR.
>> TAKE THIS SCARF AND STRANGLE
HIM TO DEATH.
>> YES, MA’AM.
>> I REMEMBER SEEING THE
MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE WHEN IT
FIRST CAME OUT, AND IT’S A VERY
UNSETTLING OPENING.
YOU REALLY FEEL LIKE THEY’RE
BRAINWASHING YOU WHILE YOU’RE
WATCHING IT.
>> HEY, SARGE, CUT IT OUT.
>> QUIET, PLEASE.
YOU JUST SIT THERE QUIETLY AND
COOPERATE.
>> YES, MA’AM.
>> THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE WHEN
PEOPLE SEE IT FOR THE FIRST
TIME, IT KIND OF BLOWS THEIR
MIND.
IT’S GOT SCI‐FI ELEMENTS TO IT
IN ADDITION TO BEING A REALLY
INTRIGUING POLITICAL THRILLER.
>> I HAVE HERE A LIST OF THE
NAMES OF 207 PERSONS WHO ARE
KNOWN BY THE SECRETARY OF
DEFENSE AS BEING MEMBERS OF THE
COMMUNIST PARTY.
>> THE MANCHURIAN CANDIDATE IS
NOT A TIMID FILM.
IT TAKES ON McCARTHYISM FULL
TLOTD
THROTTLE.
>> ALL THEY’RE SAYING ARE THERE
ANY COMMUNISTS IN THE DEFENSE
DEPARTMENT?
OF COURSE NOT.
THEY’RE SAYING HOW MANY
COMMUNISTS ARE THERE IN THE
DEFENSE DEPARTMENT?
>> ANGELA LANSBURY IS THE EVIL
FIGURE MANIPULATING BEHIND THE
SCENES.
>> STOP TALKING ABOUT AN EXPERT
ALL OF A SUDDEN AND GET OUT
THERE AND SAY WHAT YOU’RE
SUPPOSED TO SAY.
>> AS WITH ALL GREAT VILLAINS,
SHE EMBRACES THAT ROLE.
SHE DOESN’T WANT YOU TO FEEL
SYMPATHY FOR HER.
SHE WANTS YOU TO GET OUT OF HER
WAY.
>> YOU ARE TO SHOOT THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE THROUGH THE
HEAD.
>> WHEN JOHN F. KENNEDY WAS
ASSASSINATED, FRANK SINATRA
DIDN’T WANT PEOPLE TO SEE THIS
FILM.
BUT THIS WAS NOT ABOUT THE POWER
OF ASSASSINATION IN CHANGING
POLITICAL EVENTS.
THIS WAS ABOUT THE PSYCHOLOGICAL
DIMENSION OF THE COLD WAR AND
FORCING PEOPLE TO THINK ABOUT
THE NATURE OF THE FEARS THEY
HAD.
>> I DEAL IN NIGHTMARES, AND
NIGHTMARES HAVE TO BE AWFULLY
VIVID.
YOU’RE VERY GLAD WHEN YOU WAKE
UP JUST AS YOU’RE ABOUT TO DROP
THROUGH THE TRAP ON THE GALLOWS.
>> HITCHCOCK HAS SEVERAL YEARS
WHERE HE HAD A PURPLE PATCH OF
LIKE ALL CLASSICS, AND HE’S
LIKE, WELL, I’VE DONE VERTIGO.
I’VE DONE NORTH BY NORTHWEST.
NOW I’M GOING TO DO A FILM FOR
ME.
THAT FILM IS "PSYCHO".
♪
>> FOR ALFRED HITCHCOCK TO MAKE
PSYCHO, IMAGINE IF TODAY STEVEN
SPIELBERG ANNOUNCED THAT HIS
NEXT FILM WOULD BE "THE BRIDE OF
CHUCKY."
IT WAS THAT SHOCKING, AND
PARAMOUNT WOULDN’T MAKE IT.
HE ENDED UP PAYING FOR IT
HIMSELF BASICALLY.
AT THE TIME PEOPLE THOUGHT
HITCHCOCK HAD THROWN HIS CAREER
AWAY.
>> SAM, THIS IS THE LAST TIME.
>> FOR WHAT?
>> FOR THIS.
>> PSYCHO STARTS OUT AS A
DEFINITIVE FILM NOIR FROM THE
BEGINNING OF THE FILM.
WOMAN IS HAVING AN ILLICIT
AFFAIR.
SHE STEALS MONEY FROM HER OFFICE
TO GO MEET THE GUY AND RUN AWAY.
THAT’S FILM NOIR.
>> MARIAN, WHAT IN THE WORLD ‐‐
WHAT ARE YOU DOING UP HERE?
OF COURSE I’M GLAD TO SEE YOU.
I ALWAYS AM.
>> THEN ALL OF A SUDDEN, SHE
MEETS THIS GUY IN A LONELY
MOTEL, AND, MAN, IT BECOMES
SOMETHING ELSE.
>> DIRTY NIGHT.
>> YOU HAVE A VACANCY?
>> WE HAVE 12 VACANCIES.
12 CABINS, 12 VACANCIES.
>> WHEN I FIRST SAW PSYCHO, I
WAS HORRIFIED.
IT’S REALLY ONE OF THE CREEPIEST
MOVIES EVER MADE.
>> HITCHCOCK WAS GREAT AT WHERE
TO PUT THE CAMERA.
HE HELPED TELL THE STORY.
>> IF ANYONE EVER TALKED TO ME
THE WAY I HEARD THE WAY SHE
SPOKE TO YOU ‐‐
>> HE REALLY KNEW HOW TO THROW
US OFF BALANCE BY PUTTING HIS
CAMERA OFF BALANCE.
>> WHEN PSYCHO OPENED IN NEW
YORK CITY, THE PRESS SAT
UPSTAIRS IN THE BALCONY, 500
PEOPLE, AND THE PAYING CUSTOMERS
WERE DOWNSTAIRS, ABOUT A
THOUSAND PEOPLE.
WHEN WE GOT TO THE SHOWER SCENE,
I’VE NEVER SEEN SUCH A REACTION.
♪
[ SCREAMING ]
>> THE AUDIENCE DOWNSTAIRS WAS
SCREAMING TO SUCH A DEGREE THAT
YOU DID NOT HEAR THE SOUNDTRACK.
AND IT WASN’T A SCREAM LIKE AHH,
AHH, AHH.
IT WAS AHHH!
THEY COULDN’T BELIEVE IT.
I COULDN’T BELIEVE IT JANET
LEIGH WAS GETTING KILLED.
SHE’S THE [ BLEEP ] STAR OF THE
PICTURE.
>> SUDDENLY WE HAVE NO
PROTAGONIST TO ATTACH OURSELVES
TO.
THERE’S NO MOVIE BEFORE THAT
EVER DID THAT, AND IT WAS
TERRIFYING TO BE STRANDED THERE
ALONE WITH A KILLER.
AND WHO IS THIS KILLER?
♪
>> THAT INVENTION IS REALLY
SOMETHING EXTRAORDINARY, AND IT
HERALDED A DIFFERENT KIND OF
FILMMAKING.
IT FELT MORE PERSONAL AND MORE
WEIRD.
HE WAS TRULY A MASTER OF TERROR.
>>> I DON’T USE SEX TO LAND AN
ACCOUNT.
>> WHEN DO YOU USE IT?
>> I DON’T.
>> MY CONDOLENCES TO YOUR
HUSBAND.
>> OH, I’M NOT MARRIED.
>> THAT FIGURES.
>> THE CONVENTIONAL WISDOM ABOUT
DORIS DAY IS OF COURSE SHE’S A
PROFESSIONAL VIRGIN, A PRUDE, A
RELIC FROM THE 1950s.
ALL OF THOSE THINGS ARE WRONG.
>> HELLO?
>> GOOD MORNING.
>> I THINK DORIS DAY IS A BRIDGE
BETWEEN 50s MORALITY AND 60s
MORALITY.
>> OH, MY DARLING.
OH, MY DARLING, ARE YOU HAVING
ANOTHER NIGHTMARE?
>> WHAT WAS COOL ABOUT THE
MOVIES THAT SHE WAS IN WAS THAT
THEY WERE CENTERED AROUND HER
AND HER PROBLEMS.
>> SHE WAS A FEMALE PROTAGONIST,
WHICH WAS UNUSUAL AT THAT TIME.
>> IF WE LOOK BACK AT DOR ISZ
DAY FILMS TODAY, WE CAN SEE SHE
REALLY ESTABLISHED A NEW KIND OF
REPRESENTATION OF A CAREER WOMAN
WHO WAS VERY MUCH IN CHARGE OF
HER OWN LIFE.
SHE WAS INDEPENDENT, URBAN, AND
THAT REALLY WAS A KIND OF A
PROTOTYPE FOR THE LIBERATED
WOMAN.
>> MRS. AMERICA MIGHT DO WELL TO
START EARLY IN HER MARRIAGE, A
PLANNED CULTIVATION OF OUTSIDE
INTERESTS AND HOBBIES.
>> IN THE EARLY 60s, FILM COMEDY
WAS VERY COMMERCIAL.
IT WAS THAT COLORFUL, FUN,
FREE‐WHEELING COMEDY STYLE.
YOU GOT PETER SELLERS IN THE
BLAKE EDWARDS MOVIE "THE PINK
PANTHER".
>> WE MUST FIND THAT WOMAN.
>> AT THE SAME TIME THAT YOU HAD
JERRY LEWIS.
>> AS A KID, YOU LOVED JERRY
LEWIS BECAUSE HE WAS A KID.
HE WAS A KID DOING ALL THESE
WACKY THINGS THAT YOU WOULD LIKE
TO DO.
I MEAN YOU WANTED TO TALK LIKE
THAT AND WALK AROUND LIKE THAT.
HE WAS FUN.
>> JERRY LEWIS IS A CROSS ROADS
COMEDIAN BETWEEN THOSE OLDER
VAUD VILLIAN COMEDIANS AND THE
MODERN NEUROTIC COMEDIAN, BUT
STILL KIND OF RELYING ON AN
OLDER PERSONA.
THERE WERE A LOT OF NEW FILM
MAKING TECHNIQUES, ESPECIALLY
WITH MOVIES LIKE "THE ERRAND
BOY."
♪
>> AS A FILMMAKER, JERRY LEWIS
IS USING THE ELEMENTS OF CINEMA
TO ENHANCE THE COMEDY.
HE’S REALLY PLAYING WITH THE
MEDIUM WITH AS MUCH ATTENTION TO
THE FILMMAKING AS TO THE
PERFORMANCE.
>> JERRY LEWIS, IN THE EARLY
60s, MADE A DIFFERENT TYPE OF
COMEDY, COMEDY FOR ALL AGES.
AND THERE WAS A LARGER CULTURAL
SHIFT JUST ABOUT TO HAPPEN.
>> THOSE ARE THE FACTS, FELIX.
YOU GOT TO FACE IT.
YOU CAN’T SPEND THE REST OF YOUR
LIFE CRYING.
IT ANNOYS PEOPLE IN THE MOVIE.
>> IT WASN’T PHYSICAL COMEDY.
IT WAS CEREBRAL.
INCREASINGLY IN THE 60s, COMEDY
BECAME SOMETHING FOR ADULTS.
>> YOU’RE A WRITER AND A
DIRECTOR?
>> YES, I’VE WRITTEN AND
DIRECTED A NEW MOTION FLICK
CALLED "THE PRODUCERS" STARRING
ZERO MOSS TELL AND INTRODUCING
GENE WILDER.
>> "THE PRODUCERS" IS JERN
WINLY, I WOULD SAY ONE OF THE
TOP COMEDIES OF ALL TIME.
>> YES?
>> YES WHAT?
>> WHAT YOU WERE SAYING.
KEEP TALKING.
>> IN THE PRODUCERS, THEY’RE
GOING TO GET INVESTORS TO INVEST
IN A BROADWAY PLAY THAT THEY
KNOW WILL FAIL SO THEY CAN TAKE
OFF WITH THE MONEY.
[ SCREAMING ]
>> I WANT THAT MONEY!
>> I FELL ON MY KEYS.
>> THE SURE FIRE DISASTER, IT’S
CALLED "SPRINGTIME FOR HITLER".
♪ SPRINGTIME FOR HITLER ♪
>> YOU CAN’T BELIEVE THE
PRODUCERS GOT MADE.
THE IDEA OF DOING A MUSICAL IN
WHICH HITLER IS THE STAR, I MEAN
THAT CONCEPT ALONE WAS BRILLIANT
AND UNPRECEDENTED AND IT REALLY
GAVE YOU A SENSE OF WHO MEL
BROOKS WAS AS A COMIC MIND.
>> I WANT TO THANK THE ACADEMY
OF ARTS SCIENCES AND MONEY FOR
THIS WONDERFUL AWARD.
>> MEL IS A GIANT, MAYBE THE
BALLSIEST OF THEM.
>> I’LL JUST SAY WHAT’S IN MY
HEART.
BA BUMP, BA BUMP, BA BUMP.
>> BUT ONE OF THE BEST OF THEM.
EXPLOSIVELY FUNNY.
>> DR. STRANGELOVE, DO WE HAVE
ANYTHING LIKE THAT IN THE WORKS?
>> A MOMENT, PLEASE,
MR. PRESIDENT.
>> "DR. STRANGELOVE" IS ABOUT
HOW THE UNITED STATES AND
RUSSIA, THROUGH A SERIES OF
MISUNDERSTANDINGS AND ACTIONS BY
CERTIFIABLY CRAZY PEOPLE, ALMOST
COME TO THE BRINK OF NUCLEAR
WAR.
>> NOW, THEN, DIMITRI, YOU KNOW
HOW WE’VE ALWAYS TALKED ABOUT
THE POSSIBILITY OF SOMETHING
GOING WRONG WITH THE BOMB.
>> YOU KNOW, AS A COMEDY PERSON,
THERE IS A COMEDY BEFORE "DR.
STRANGELOVE" AND AFTER "DR.
STRANGELOVE" BECAUSE NO ONE HAD
SEEN ANYTHING THAT DRY.
THE SATIRE OF IT, IN ORDER TO DO
IT RIGHT, YOU HAD TO DO IT
COMPLETELY STRAIGHT.
>> OF COURSE I LIKE TO SPEAK TO
YOU.
OF COURSE I LIKE TO SAY HELLO.
>> ON THE SURFACE, IT WAS NOT
SUPPOSED TO SCARE ANYBODY
BECAUSE IT WAS A COMEDY WHEN, IN
FACT, IT’S NOT A COMEDY.
THE FILM REALLY, REALLY TAKES
YOU TO THE END OF THE WORLD.
>> GENTLEMEN, YOU CAN’T FIGHT IN
HERE.
THIS IS THE WAR ROOM.
>> PETER SELLERS WAS
UNBELIEVABLE AS EVERY CHARACTER,
BUT ESPECIALLY AS
DR. STRANGELOVE.
>> PETER SELLERS IS WHAT MAKES
THAT FILM SING, THAT YOU CAN
FEET THAT STANLEY KUBRICK HAS
SOMEBODY THAT HE TRUSTS TO GO
COMPLETELY OFF THE RAILS AND
THAT HE KNOWS HOW TO FILM IT AND
CONTAIN IT AND USE IT FOR THE
PURPOSES OF THE STORY.
>> THE WHOLE POINT OF THE
DOOMSDAY MACHINE IS LOST IF YOU
KEEP IT A SECRET.
WHY DIDN’T YOU TELL THE WORLD,
EH?
>> WHEN I FIRST SAW THE FILM, I
CAME OUT OF THAT MOVIE FEARING
NUCLEAR WAR WITH THE RUSSIANS
MORE THAN I EVER HAD BEFORE.
>> I GOT A PRETTY FAIR IDEA THAT
SOMETHING DOGGONE IMPORTANT IS
GOING ON BACK THERE.
>> STANLEY KUBRICK WAS ONE OF
THE MOST AUDACIOUS FILMMAKERS IN
HISTORY.
>> WELL, BOYS, I RECKON THIS IS
IT.
NUCLEAR COMBAT TOE TO TOE WITH
THE RUSSKIES.
>> WHO ELSE WOULD HAVE SLIM
PICKENS IN A COWBOY HAT GETTING
ON AN ATOMIC BOMB AND RIDING IT
ALL THE WAY TO THE GROUND WAVING
HIS HAT OVER HIS HEAD LIKE HE’S
AT A RODEO?
IT DELIVERS ARMAGEDDON IN SONG.
♪
WITH EVERY SINGLE HYDROGEN BOMB
EXPLOSION PHOTOGRAPHED CUT
TOGETHER IN SYNC, IN HARMONY
WITH THE MUSIC.
♪
>>> I’VE HEARD A HOLLYWOOD
PRODUCER REFER TO THE MOVIE
BUSINESS AS THE TRANSPORTATION
BUSINESS.
YOU GO TO THE THEATER, AND WE
TAKE YOU SOMEWHERE ELSE.
>> BY THE 60s, THE WONDERFUL
THING ABOUT THE STUDIO SYSTEM
WAS HOW IT COULD CREATE PLACE
AND TIME SO MAGNIFICENTLY.
♪
>> SO OFTEN FILMS THAT WERE SET
IN THE PAST DIDN’T LOOK LIVED
IN.
THEY DIDN’T LOOK LIKE ACTUAL
EXPERIENCE.
IN THE ’60s, TOM JONES FINALLY
MADE IT FEEL LIKE PEOPLE LIVING
IN THESE TIMES, NOT PEOPLE
ACTING OUT THOSE TIMES.
>> MANY OF THE GREAT EPIC FILMS
IN THE ’60s HAVE HISTORICAL OR
LITERARY ENDORSEMENT, AND PEOPLE
LOVE THOSE BIG, RICH STORIES.
>> YOU SEE?
THEY LOVE US DEARLY, THESE
FRENCH.
>> SO THEY SHOULD.
WE PAY THEM ENOUGH.
>> THE FIRST MOVIE THAT HAD A
HUGE IMPACT ON ME WAS "BECKETT."
I JUST THOUGHT, WOW, WHAT GOES
ON HERE?
THIS IS POWERFUL MEDICINE.
>> I WOULD HAVE GONE TO WAR WITH
ALL ENGLAND’S MIGHT BEHIND ME
AND EVEN AGAINST ENGLAND’S
INTERESTS TO DEFEND YOU, THOMAS.
>> O’TOOLE WITH BURTON, JUST
KNOCKED OUT.
THEIR CAPACITY TO SHOW AGONIZED,
WRENCHING EMOTION.
>> YOU NEVER LOVED ME, DID YOU,
THOMAS?
>> INSOFAR AS I WAS CAPABLE OF
LOVE, YES, I DID.
>> SEEING THESE TWO GIANTS
PERFORMING, REALLY IT STAYED
WITH ME A VERY LONG TIME.
♪
>> A MAN FOR ALL SEASONS IS THIS
BEAUTIFUL MOVIE BY FRED
ZIMMERMAN.
IT’S THIS RARE PORTRAIT OF A MAN
WITH ACTUAL MORALS, WHO STANDS
UP FOR WHAT HE BELIEVES.
>> AT COURT THEY OFFER YOU ALL
SORTS OF THINGS, HOMES, MANORS,
MANOR HOUSES, COATS OF ARMS.
A MAN SHOULD GO WHERE HE WON’T
BE TEMPTED.
>> IT’S ABOUT UNRAVELING A
DIFFICULT SITUATION BETWEEN THE
DHOICH AND THE STATE.
THE KING WANTED TO BE DIVORCED.
THE CHURCH WILL NOT ALLOW THIS.
HOW DO YOU NAVIGATE THOSE TWO
MASTERS AND KEEP BOTH HAPPY?
THEREIN LIES THE FILM.
>> YOUR GRACE, I’M NOT FITTED TO
MEDDLE IN THESE MATTERS.
TO ME, IT SEEMS A MATTER FOR THE
HOLY SEE.
>> THOMAS, DOES A MAN NEED A
POPE TO TELL HIM WHERE HE’S
SINNED.
>> THIS IS A MAN KNOWING HE’S
GOING TO HAVE TO PAY A TERRIBLE
PRICE, AND WHO HONORS HIS
CONSCIENCE AND HONORS HIS GOD IN
THIS CASE RATHER THAN SURRENDER
TO THE KING.
>> BE NOT AFRAID OF YOUR OFFICE.
SEND ME TO GOD.
>> YOU’RE VERY SHORT OF THAT,
SIR THOMAS?
>> HE WILL NOT REFUSE ONE ‐‐
>> THERE’S NOTHING QUITE LIKE A
GIANT EPIC.
YOU GET LOST.
IT’S THREE HOURS AND CHANGE.
YOU GO TO A DIFFERENT PLACE IN A
DIFFERENT TIME, AND WHEN IT
WORKS, IT TRANSPORTS YOU IN A
WAY THAT REALLY CINEMA DOES
BETTER THAN ANYTHING ELSE.
>> DR. ZHIVAGO IS ONE OF THESE
HUGE, LITERAL EPICS THAT DAVID
LEAN SPECIALIZED IN.
>> YOU COULD SAY THAT DAVID LEAN
IS THE TOLSTOY OF MOVIES BECAUSE
HE WORKS ON CANVASES THAT ARE AS
LARGE AS TOLSTOY’S, AND HE HAS
THE AMBITION OF TOLSTOY.
>> IN DR. ZHIVAGO, OMAR SHARIF,
WHO HAD DONE LAWRENCE OF ARABIA
FOR LEAN, THE TEMPESTUOUS LAURA
PLAYED BY THE GREAT JULIE
CHRISTIE.
>> WHAT ARE WE GOING TO DO?
>> I DON’T KNOW.
>> IT’S A BEAUTIFULLY MADE SOAP
OPERA WITH ALL THE RUSSIAN
EMOTION.
LEAN WAS VERY CAPABLE AT THATPOI
IN HIS LIFE OF GOING BACK AND
FORTH FROM THE SPECTACULAR TO
THE INTIMATE.
>> THE ’60s MIGHT HAVE BEEN
WHERE HOLLYWOOD MIGHT HAVE GOT
ITS BIGGEST EPICS RIGHT, BUT
ALSO THOSE MOVIES WERE JUST TOO
BIG AND TOO DIFFICULT TO MAKE.
YOU LOOK AT SOMETHING LIKE WHAT
CLEOPATRA CAST.
IT VERY THEY’RELY CRIPPLED NOT
ONLY ONE STUDIO BUT THE
BUSINESS.
>> THE MOTION PICTURE CASTING
ACHIEVEMENT OF THE YEAR IS ABOUT
TO BECOME A RECORDED FACT.
THE OCCASION, THE HOLLYWOOD
SIGNING OF THE EXOTIC ELIZABETH
FOR THE MOST EXOTIC ROLE IN HER
CAREER.
AND THE ROLE OF CLEOPATRA.
WHAT A ROLE, AND LIZ IS THE GAL
TO DO IT JUSTICE.
>> AS CLEOPATRA GOT MADE, THE
COST OF IT KEPT PILING UP AND
PILING UP.
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS IN TODAY’S
DOLLARS.
IT WAS SO ELABORATE.
THESE WERE NOT CGI MOMENTS, NOT
COMPUTER GRAPHICS.
THE PEOPLE YOU SEE ON THE SCREEN
IN THESE HUGE SCENES WITH ALL
THESE EXTRAS, THOSE ARE ALL REAL
PEOPLE.
THIS WAS A MASSIVE UNDERTAKING.
>> NOTHING LIKE THIS HAS COME TO
ROME SINCE ROMULUS.
>> FOR THE ROLE OF MARK ANTHONY,
THEY HIRED RICHARD BURTON.
BURTON WAS A GREAT SHAKESPEAREAN
ACTOR.
IN THE VERY FIRST SCENE THEY
SHOT WAS ON CLEOPATRA’S BARGE,
AND THERE’S A VERY PASSIONATE
KISS THAT GOES ON AND ON.
AND THE DIRECTOR, JOE
MANKIEWICZ, SAID, CUT, CUT, CUT.
AND IT WAS CLEAR SOMETHING HAD
BEEN IGNITED, AND THEN SUDDENLY
YOU HAD THIS SCANDAL.
>> ALL THE PAPARAZZI IN THE
WORLD CONVERGED, AND EVERYONE
WAS ALL ABOUT BURTON/TAYLOR.
WHAT’S HAPPENING?
THEY WERE BOTH MARRIED TO OTHER
PEOPLE.
IN SOME WAYS, THE DRAMA OUTSIDE
THE MOVIE GOT MORE INVOLVING
THAN THE DRAMA INSIDE THE MOVIE.
>> THIS LIFE, HOW IT HURTS, HOW
LOVE CAN STAB THE HEART.
>> CLEOPATRA IN MANY WAYS
WRECKED MY UNCLE’S CAREER.
IT SORT OF ‐‐ HE HATED IT.
>> CONGRATULATIONS.
A WONDERFUL, WONDERFUL EVENING.
>> YOU MUST KNOW SOMETHING I
DON’T.
>> WELL, I MUST TELL YOU, I DO.
>> CLEOPATRA ACTUALLY MADE GOOD
MONEY.
IT JUST DIDN’T MAKE ENOUGH MONEY
TO RECOUP THE ENORMOUS EXPENSE
OF THE PRODUCTION.
>> FOX FAMOUSLY HAD TO SELL OFF
THE BACK PART OF THEIR LOT.
SO IT BECAME THE DEATH KNELL OF
THE STUDIO SYSTEM.
>> TO REACH A POINT WHERE A
MOVIE LIKE KLEE PAT RA COULD
REPRESENT AN EXPENDITURE OF
NEARLY ONE‐HALF THE NET CAPITAL
OF THE COMPANY MAKING IT AND
DESTROY THE MANAGEMENT OF THAT
COMPANY IN THE BARG
>>> IF SOMEONE SAID TO YOU, IT’S
1964.
THE LAPD REPORTS THAT 15,000
SCREAMING TEENAGERS, MOST OF
THEM FEMALE, ARE IN FRONT OF THE
EGYPTIAN THEATER, WHAT DO YOU
THINK IS HAPPENING?
MOST PEOPLE SAY, THE BEATLES ARE
ARRIVING.
ACTUALLY, IT’S THE OPENING NIGHT
IN L. A. OF "MY FAIR LADY."
>> THE PREMIERE OF MY FAIR LADY.
ONE OF THE BIGGEST OPENING
NIGHTS IN RECENT YEARS WITH A
ROSTER OF STARS THAT WILL MAKE
YOUR EYES BLINK.
THE STAR OF THE PICTURE, REX
HARRISON.
>> IN MY FAIR LADY, THEY HAVE A
CONTEST TO SEE IF HENRY HIGGINS
CAN TRANSFORM THIS FLOWER GIRL
WITH HER COCKNEY ACCENT INTO
SOMEONE THAT HE COULD PASS OFF
AS ROYALTY IN HIGH SOCIETY.
>> YOU SEE THIS CREATURE WITH
HER CURB STONE ENGLISH, THE
ENGLISH THAT WILL KEEP HER IN
THE GUTTER UNTIL THE END OF HER
DAYS, WELL, SIR, IN SIX MONTHS I
COULD PASS HER OFF AS A DUCHESS
AT AN EMBASSY BALL.
>> REX HARRISON BECAME THAT RARE
GUY WHO COULD RECREATE HIS ROLE
ON FILM.
BUT FOR THE ROLE OF ELIZA
DOOLITTLE.
BUT JULIE ANDREWS WAS TURNED
DOWN BY JACK WARNER, WHO
PERSONALLY PRODUCED THE MOVIE,
IN FAVOR OF AUDREY HEPBURN
♪ THE RAIN IN SPAIN STAYS MAINLY
IN THE PLAIN ♪
>> BY GEORGE, SHE’S GOT IT.
BY GEORGE, SHE’S GOT IT.
>> I LOVE MY FAIR LADY.
THE MUSIC IS INCREDIBLE.
♪ I COULD HAVE DANCED ALL
NIGHT ♪
♪ AND STILL HAVE BEGGED FOR
MORE ♪
>> MY FAIR LADY WON BEST PICTURE
IN 1964.
IT IS CONSIDERED A SUCCESS ALL
AROUND, AND EVEN THOUGH JULIE
ANDREWS HAD BEEN PASSED OVER FOR
THE ROLE, SHE GOT MARY POPPINS,
AND SHE HAD THE LAST LAUGH.
>> LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, HERE IS
JULIE ANDREWS, MARY POPPINS.
>> MARY POPPINS WAS A HUGE MOVIE
FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY, AND YOU
HAVE JULIE ANDREWS."
SHE’S SO STRONG, SHE’S SUPER
HUMAN.
SHE FLIES IN FROM A CLOUD AND
SHE SHIFTS THE POWER STRUCTURE
IN A VERY MALE DOMINATED
HOUSEHOLD.
>> THAT’S WHAT?
>> GEORGES BANKS IS THINKING
HE’S GOING TO INTERVIEW A NANNY.
>> WE BROUGHT YOUR REFERENCES I
PRESUME.
MAY I SEE THEM.
>> I MAKE IT A POINT NEVER TO
GIVE REFERENCES.
>> SHE INTERVIEWS HIM FOR THE
JOB SO SHE’S THE BOSS FROM THE
WORD GO.
>> JULIE AND DREWS IS A SUPER
TALENT.
BEAUTIFUL.
INCREDIBLE VOICE.
♪ FOR A SPOON FULL OF SUGAR
HELPS THE MEDICINE GO DOWN ♪
>> REALLY DRY AND FUNNY.
SHE WASN’T THIS CHEER MONSTER.
IN FACT, SHE HAD A LITTLE
ATTITUDE.
>> AS I EXPECTED.
MARY POPPINS PRACTICALLY PERFECT
IN EVERY WAY.
>> IT WAS A MAGICAL WORLD OF
MUSIC AND COLOR.
♪ SUPERCALIFRAGILISTIC‐
EXPIALIDOCIOUS EVEN THOUGH THE
SOUND OF IT IS SOMETHING QUITE
ATROCIOUS ♪
>> AND IT WAS ABOUT SOMETHING.
>> I DIDN’T EVEN REALIZE TILL I
WAS SHOWING IT TO MY KIDS.
IT IS ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE OF
SPENDING TIME WITH YOUR
CHILDREN.
♪ LET’S GETS FLY A KITE UP TO
THE HIGHEST HEIGHT ♪
>> THE WINNER IS JULIE ANDREWS,
MARY POPPINS".
>> WHEN SHE WINS THE GOLDEN
GLOBE, SHE ACTUALLY THROWS A
LITTLE SHADE AT THE STUDIO FOR
OVERLOOKING HER.
>> MY THANKS TO A MAN WHO MADE A
WONDERFUL MOVIE AND MADE ALL
THIS POSSIBLE IN THE FIRST
PLACE, MR. JACK WARNER.
>> SHE ALSO GOT AN OSCAR, THEN
WENT ON TO DO PROBABLY THE
GREATEST, CERTAINLY THE MOST
SUCCESSFUL OF THE 1960s
MUSICALS, THE ROGERS AND
HAMMERSTEIN CLASSIC THE SOUND OF
MUSIC".
>> THE HILLS ARE ALIVE WITH THE
SOUND OF MUSIC.
♪ WITH SONGS THEY HAVE SUNG FOR
A THOUSAND YEARS IS ♪
>> THE FIRST MUSICAL I SAW WAS
SOUND OF MUSIC".
IT CHANGED MY LIFE.
THERE’S SOMETHING ABOUT IT THAT
IS JUST WONDERFUL AND JOYOUS.
>> RAIN DROPS ON ROSES AND
WHISKERS ON KITTENS BROETS
COPPER KET COUNSEL AND WARM
WOOLEN MITTENS BROWN PAPER
PACKAGES TIED UP IN SFRINGS
STRINGS ♪
>> WHETHER HE YOU’RE A KID AND
YOU WATCH THE SOUND OF MUSIC" IT
SEEMS EXCITING.
THERE’S A KID OF EVERY AGE IN
THE VON TRAPP FAMILY.
NO MATTER HOW OLD YOU ARE,
THERE’S SOMEBODY YOU CAN RELATE
TO OR CONNECT WITH.
♪ BEAT FLOAT BEAT FLY ♪
♪
>> IT’S WHIMSICAL AND FANTASTIC
WITHIN A SETTING THAT IS VERY
REAL FROM A HISTORICAL
PERSPECTIVE.
THEY’RE RUNNING FROM NAZIS BUT
THEY’RE DOING IT IN SONG.
♪ GOOD‐BYE ♪
>> WE WANT TO SPECIALIZE IN
TELEVISION AND FILM.
>> TELEVISION I JUST WANT TO DO
ONE A YEAR AND NOT FOR MANY MORE
YEARS BUT FILMS IS SOMETHING
THAT I’D LIKE TO CONCENTRATE ON,
IF I WORK, WHEN I WORK.
>> FUNNY GIRL" IS THE MUSICAL
THAT SIGNIFIES THE ARRIVAL OF
BARBRA STREISAND WHO HAD
ORIGINALNATED THE ROLE ON
BROADWAY.
WE MET HER FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
FILM WHEN SHE LOOKS IN THE
MIRROR AND SAYS, HELLO GORGEOUS.
>> AND WE JUST IMMEDIATELY FALL
IN LOVE WITH HER.
>> FANNY, YOU’RE AN ENCHANTING
GIRL.
I WISH I COULD GET TO KNOW YOU
BETTER.
>> GIVE ME SIX GOOD REASONS WHY
NOT.
>> ORDINARILY WE RELATE TO A
STAR ON SCREEN VICARIOUSLY.
I WISH I COULD BE LIKE THAT.
BARBRA STREISAND SAYS YOU ARE
LIKE THIS.
I’M YOU.
>> CAN I ROLLER SKATE?
♪
>> THE THING ABOUT BARBARA
STREISAND IS SHE CAN CONVEY A
MOMENT WITH JUST AN EYE FLICK
AND THEN A MOMENT LATER SHE
SINGS IN A VOICE THAT I’M LIKE
PLASTERED TO THE WALL.
WHAT’S HAPPENING.
SHE’S INCREDIBLE.
♪ LIFE’S CAN CANDY AND THE SUN’S
A BALL OF BUTTER ♪
♪ DON’T BRING AROUND A CLOUD
DON’T RAIN ON MY PARADE ♪
>> FUNNY GIRL" SIGNALED THE
BIRTH OF A GREAT, GREAT FILM
ACTRESS.
OF COURSE, SHE WINS THE ACADEMY
AWARD FOR HER FIRST FILM ROLE
EVER.
>> HELLO, GORGEOUS.
>> WE’VE GOT TOM.
>>> CHARACTER.
>> PAUL NEW MAN CAME OUT OF THE
1950s AS ONE OF THE TOP LEADING
MEN IN HOLLYWOOD.
THERE WAS AN OSCAR NOMINATION
FOR CAT ON A HOT TIN ROOF" FROM
1958.
HE ALSO LOOKED LIKE PAUL NEW
MAN.
COULD HE HAVE BEEN IN ANY MOVIE
HE WANTED TO BE IN.
>> I’M THE BEST YOU EVER SEEN.
I’M THE BEST THERE IS.
>> HE HAD EVERYTHING.
HE COMES FROM THE ACTOR’S
STUDIO.
A MAJOR STAR ON BROADWAY.
CHARISMA ON SCREEN.
HE WAS THE HUSTLER.
YOU CAN’T GET BETTER THAN THAT.
>> THAT MAN SHOOT A GREAT GAME
OF POOL.
>> SO DO YOU, FAST EDDIE.
>> THAT WIDE SCREEN BLACK AND
WHITE WITH HIM AND JACKIE
GLEASON AND GEORGE C. SCOTT WAS
SOMETHING SO UNIQUE AT THAT
TIME.
A CHARACTER PIECE THAT WAY.
>> JOE.
I JUST HOPE FOR YOUR SAKING THAT
THIS HOUSE IS ON FIRE.
>> I’M SORRY TO ROUST YOU OUT
BUT WE’VE GOT TROUBLE AT THE
RANCH.
>> YOU GOT TROUBLE RIGHT HERE,
BUB.
>> IN HUD, HE WAS SUPPOSED TO BE
KIND OF A SHALLOW DAMAGED
CHARACTER AND HE WAS PLAYING
THAT TO THE HILT AND
PARTICULARLY DEALING WITH THE
DARKSIDE OF THINGS.
>> YOU DON’T LOOK OUT FOR
YOURSELF, THE ONLY HELPING HAND
YOU’LL EVER GET IS WHEN THEY
LOWER THE BOX.
>> "HUD" IS A KIND OF COMMENTARY
ON WHERE YOU END UP IF YOU BUY
INTO THE MYTH OF THE WESTERN
HERO.
YOU END UP WITH A GUY WHO DRINKS
TOO MUCH, HAS NO RESPECT FOR
WOMEN, S WHO’S MASCULINE IN THE
DIVORCE SENSE OF THE TERM YET
HUD IS ATTRACTIVE TO US BECAUSE
HE’S PLAYED BID PAUL NEW MAN.
>> IN COOL HAND LUKE, NEW MAN
CLEARLY IS A FIGURE OF THE
COUNTER CULTURE MOVEMENT.
REBELLING AGAINST AUTHORITY.
>> LAY DOWN, LUKE.
HE’S JUST GOING TO KNOCK YOU
DOWN AGAIN, BUDDY.
>> CIRCUMSTANCE HASN’T MADE LUKE
A CRIMINAL.
>> STAY DOWN.
>> IT’S ALMOST HIS CHOICE.
>> YOU’RE GOING TO HAVE TO KILL
ME.
>> OR HIS REFUSAL TO DO WHAT’S
EXPECTED OF HIM.
>> DON’T YOU EVER TALK THAT WAY
TO ME.
>> THE WARDEN IN THE FILM IS
PLAYED BY STROTHER MARTIN.
IT’S ONE OF THE GREAT TEN‐LINE
PERFORMANCES IN MOVIES.
>> WHAT WE’VE GOT HERE FAILURE
TO COMMUNICATE.
>> AND IT REALLY FEELS LIKE A
’60s LINE WHERE YOU KNOW, JUST
IN ONE MOMENT, KIDS AND ADULTS
COULD SEE THE GENERATION GAP AND
SEE EACH OTHER ON THE OTHER
SIDE.
>> SORRY, LUKE.
JUST DOING MY JOB.
YOU GOT TO APPRECIATE THAT.
>> AH.
CALLING IT YOUR JOB DON’T MAKE
IT RIGHT, BOSS.
>> I STILL THINK HE’S THE LAST
OF THE OLD MOVIE STARS WHEN HE
STARTS THE ’60s, HE’S UP AGAINST
THE LIKES OF CARRY GRANT AND
JOHN WAYNE AND MARLON BRANDO AND
BY THE END OF THE ’60s, HE’S UP
AGAINST THE LIKES OF STEVE
McQUEEN AND SEAN CONNERY.
AND FOR McQUEEN, I THINK NEW MAN
WAS SORT OF A TARGET.
>> THE GREAT ESCAPE IS AS GOOD A
PRIMPER OF WAR MOVIE AS YOUR
YOU’RE GOING TO GET.
A GREAT ENSEMBLE CAST BUT
ANCHORED BY STEVE McQUEEN.
>> BY MORNING I’M GOING TO BE SO
FAR AWAY YOU COULDN’T HEAR IT IF
THEY WERE SHOOTING AT ME WITH
HOWITZERS.
>> HE’S NOT A BIG GUY LIKE JOHN
WAYNE BUT HE HAD A QUALITY OF
BELIEVABILITY.
YOU BELIEVED THAT HE WAS TOUGH,
WIRY, RESOURCEFUL.
>> WASN’T IT AWHILE AGO THE
STUDIOS PROHIBITED YOU DOING ANY
RACING WHILE YOU WERE ACTUALLY
IN PRODUCTION?
>> SHH.
>> I SEE ALL KINDS OF EXECUTIVE
LOOKING PEOPLE SANDING AROUND
WITH THEIR FINGERS CROSSED.
>> THEY’RE BEING NICE TO ME ON
THIS FILM.
>> STEVE McQUEEN IS THE MAN.
>> TO KNOW THAT HE COULD DRIVE
THOSE CARS, CORIDE THOSE
MOTORCYCLES MADE HIM THE MODERN
KIND OF MOVIE STAR HERO.
>> HE DIDN’T CALL HIMSELF THE
KING OF COOL BUT IT’S CLEAR WHY
HE GOT THE NICKNAME.
WHEN HE DRESSES UP IN THE THOMAS
CROWN AFFAIR IT WAS COOL.
THE WAY HE PLAYS CARDS IN THE
CINCINNATI KID HE WAS COOL.
WHEN HE DRESSES DOWN IN "BULLET"
HE WAS COOL.
HE COULDN’T HELP IT.
>> BULLET HAS THE PERFECT
McQUEEN MOMENT, SOMEBODY’S
FOLLOWING HIM.
HE FIGURES IT OUT.
HE DOESN’T TRY TO ESCAPE WHICH
IS WHAT ANYBODY WOULD DO.
INSTEAD HE TURNS THE CAR AROUND
AND HE STARTS CHASING THEM.
THAT’S STEVE McQUEEN.
>> THERE ARE CAR CHASES BEFORE
IN MOVIES AND NEVER A CAR CHASE
LIKE "BULLET."
YOU KNOW AT THAT POINT WHERE
PHIL HICKMAN THE OTHER DRIVER
CLIPS IN HIS SEAT BELT, THE
AUDIENCE IS LIKE OKAY, HERE WE
GO.
IT’S LIKE A MASTERPIECE OF
ACTION CINEMA.
I CAN NEVER GO TO SAN FRANCISCO
AND SEE THOSE HILLS WITHOUT
THINKING OF THAT MUSTANG TAKING
THOSE TURNS.
>> IT’S THE MOST FAMOUS CAR
CHASE IN ALL OF MOVIES.
BUT THAT SECONDARY TO ME TO THE
FEELING OF I JUST WANT TO LOOK
AT THIS STORY IN THIS CITY WITH
THIS GUY LEADING ME THROUGH.
THE WHOLE MOVIE IS REALLY ABOUT
McQUEEN AND HIS PERSONA.
>> I ADMIRE YOUR CURRENTLY, MR.
>> FRENCH.
SYLVIA TRENCH.
I ADMIRE YOUR LUCK.
MR.?
>> BOND, JAMES BOND.
>> IF YOU GREW UP IN THE ’60s
IT’S HARD FOR YOU NOT TO
IDENTIFY WITH BOND.
HE WAS LIKE I’M KICKING ASS, I’M
TAKING NAMES, I’M MAKING EQUIPS,
I GOT YOUR GIRL.
>> DID YOU SAY YOU HAD TO LEAVE?
>> IMMEDIATELY.
>> SO WHEN THE FIRST JAMES BOND
FILM WAS MADE, A LOT OF RISKS
WERE TAKEN.
AND SEAN CONNERY WAS ONE OF
THOSE.
>> JAMES, WHERE ON EARTH HAVE
YOU BEEN?
I’VE BEEN SEARCHING LONDON FOR
YOU.
>> IAN FLEMMING AND OTHERS WERE
NOT SUPER CONFIDENT ABOUT
CONNERY IN THAT ROLE.
BUT THE AUDIENCE RECEPTION
REALLY PROVED THAT CONNERY COULD
PULL OFF BOND.
>> ONE THING I READ ABOUT YOU
SAID YOU WEREN’T LIVING UP TO
YOUR IMAGE.
>> THEY PAY THE FINES IF I LIVE
UP TO THE IMAGE.
>> SEAN CONNERY WAS SO HANDSOME,
THERE’S A KIND OF NAUGHTY FUN
JUST TO HIS SMILE AND YOU FELT
AS THOUGH YOU DIDN’T NEED TO
KNOW HIM.
YOU WEREN’T ASKING FOR AN
INTERNAL PERFORMANCE FROM HIM.
HE WAS SOMEBODY YOU COULD
PROJECT A FANTASY ON.
>> MY FRIENDS CALL ME TANYA.
>> MINE CALL ME JAMES BOND.
>> JAMES BOND IS CREATED DURING
THE COLD WAR BY IAN FLEMING AND
IN COLD WAR TERMS, JAMES BOND IS
EVERYTHING THAT THE RUSSIANS ARE
NOT.
AND THAT BECOMES A KIND OF
SUBLIMINAL APPEAL.
>> TAKE IT EASY, 007.
FIRE ESCAPE ONLY FOR ONE.
>> IN FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE,
THERE’S A FIGHT INSIDE A TRAIN
CAR THAT CONNERY HAS WITH ROBERT
SHAW.
AND IT IS IN A TINY CONFINED
SPACE AND IT IS BRUTAL.
AND CONNERY COULD ALWAYS GET
THIS LOOK ON HIS FACE LIKE I’M
NOT GOING TO MAKE IT OUT OF THIS
ROOM ALIVE.
AND THAT’S SOMETHING THAT IS
ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL TO AN
ACTION STAR.
>> GOLD FINGERING IS WHEN IT
BECOMES A SUPER SPY FILM.
IT HAS THE FANTASTIC CAL
ELEMENTS THAT KIND OF BOND
REALLY STARTS TO LEAN INTO.
WE’RE IN FORT KNOX.
THERE ARE WOMEN PILOTS THAT ARE
VERY SEXY AND YOU HAVE A HENCH
MAN WHO HAS A HAT THAT CAN BE
CUT OFF YOUR HEAD IF THROWN AT
YOU LIKE A FRISBEE.
EVERYTHING ABOUT "GOLD FINGER"
INFORMS THE REST OF THE
FRANCHISE.
>> DO YOU EXPECT ME TO TALK?
>> NO, MR. BOND.
I EXPECT YOU TO DIE.
>> BOND NEVER DIES.
NO MATTER WHAT HAPPENS FROM
DECADE TO DECADE, BOND MANAGES
TO REINVENT HIMSELF TO ACHIEVE
NEW FORMS OF RELEVANCE.
"THE MISFITS."
>> HOW DO YOU COULD.
>> TO SEE GABLE TRY TO HOLD HIS
OWN WITH A LOT OF LEGENDARY
METHOD ACTORS, ELI WALL LACK AND
CLIFT AND MARILYN MONROE, A
DIFFERENT GABLE SHOWS UP TO MAKE
THAT MOVIE AND KIND OF LOVED
THAT.
>> YOU JUST SAID HE WAS ABOUT TO
GIVE IT TO HER.
>> I SELL TO DEALERS ONLY.
THAT’S ALL THEY’RE LOOKING TO
BUY IS A HORSE.
>> I WAS JUST WONDERING WHO YOU
THINK YOU’VE BEEN TALKING TO
SINCE WE MET.
>> THERE’S SOMETHING ROUGH ABOUT
THAT MOVIE.
VISCERAL MOMENTS, SUCH THAT YOU
ALMOST FEEL IT’S DOCUMENTARY
THAT YOU’RE OUT IN THE DESERT
WITH THE MUSTANGS.
>> FINISH.
IT’S LIKE ROPING A DREAM NOW.
I GOT TO FIND ANOTHER WAY TO BE
ALIVE, THAT’S ALL.
>> THAT WAS GABLE’S LAST FILM.
THAT’S GOT A VERY KIND OF
ELIJIAC FEELING TO IT.
THE END TO THE TRADITIONAL MOVIE
WEST IS COMING AND THIS FILM IS
KIND OF A MONUMENT TO THAT.
>> HOW MANY OF YOU DID THEY
HIRE?
>> ENOUGH.
>> THE WESTERN BECOMES DARK BY
THE END OF CLASSICAL HOLLYWOOD.
YOU SEE SUCH A CHANGE IN THE
UNITED STATES CULTURE AND I
THINK THE WESTERN SHOWS THAT.
>> THESE FILMS TAKE A MORE
PSYCHOLOGICAL LOOK AT THE
WESTERN MOLD.
>> WHAT DID YOU SAY HIS NAME
WAS?
THE MAN WITH THE SILVER‐KNOBBED
WHIP.
>> I SAID LIBERTY VALANCE.
BUT IF THAT’S WHAT YOU GOT TO
DO, YOU BETTER START PACKING A
HANDGUN.
>> A GUN?
I DON’T WANT A GUN.
I DON’T WANT TO KILL HIM.
I WANT TO PUT HIM IN JAIL.
>> OH.
>> THE MAN WHO SHOT LIBERTY
VALANCE IS JOHN FORD’S LAST
GREAT WESTERN.
YET, IT’S SO DIFFERENT THAN WHAT
PRECEDED.
>> PILGRIM, YOU HAVE TO COCK IT
FIRST.
>> I FORGOT.
>> I SEE IT ALMOST AS A BOOK END
TO STAGECOACH BECAUSE STAGECOACH
INTRODUCES THE JOHN WAYNE
CHARACTER AS A YOUNG VIBRANT
OUTLAW.
AND AT MAN WHO SHOT LIBERTY
VALANCE COMES BACK TO AN OLDER
PERHAPS WISER JOHN WAYNE
CHARACTER WHO STILL HAS A CODE.
BUT IS MUCH MORE CYNICAL ABOUT
THE WORLD.
>> YOU PUT THAT PAPER OUT THE
STREETS OF SHIN BONE ARE GOING
TO BE RUNNING WITH BLOOD.
>> THE MAN WHO SHOT LIBERTY
VALANCE SOMEONE DESCRIBED IT
RECENTLY AS THE GREATEST
AMERICAN POLITICAL FILM.
IT’S ABOUT HOW REREWRITE HISTORY
TO FIT OUR MYTHIC NEEDS.
>> JOHN WAYNE ACTUALLY KILLS CAN
LIBERTY VALANCE.
JIMMY STEWART GETS CREDIT AND
BECOMES FALSE AND SOON AFTER
THAT, WAYNE IS FORGOTTEN.
>> WHO WAS TOM DONOVAN?
>> EVENTUALLY STEWART TELLS IT
THE TRUTH AND THE NEWSPAPER MAN
RIPS UP THE STORY AND SAYS ONE
OF THE MOST FAMOUS LINES IN
AMERICAN FILM.
>> THIS IS THE WEST, SIR.
WHEN THE LEGEND BECOMES FACT,
PRINT THE LEGEND.
>> HE’S RIGHT.
>> WESTERNS ARE CUT AND DRIED.
GOOD GUY WINS AT THE END.
IT’S ALWAYS FOR THE BENEFIT.
THERE ARE NO REGRETS AND THIS IS
JOHN FORD, THE MAN WHO CREATED
AN THE MYTH OF THE MOVIE WESTERN
AS MUCH AS ANYONE.
QUESTIONING IT.
SAYING WELL MAYBE, THE MARCH OF
CIVILIZATION, MAYBE IT WASN’T
ALL GOOD.
MAYBE QUALITIES OF HUMANITY WERE
THE LOST, MAYBE KINDS OF PEOPLE
WERE LOST THEY WERE BETTER
HAVING AROUND TODAY.
>> NOTHING’S TOO GOOD FOR THE
MAN WHO SHOT LIBERTY VALANCE.
>> THIS MOVIE IS LIKE LIBERTY
VALANCE.
GOOD GUY IS NOT NECESSARILY THE
GOOD GUY ANYMORE.
THIS BECOMES HEIGHTENED WITH THE
GENRE THROUGHOUT THE ’60s.
>> LEONE KIND OF TURNS THE
WESTERN ON HIS EAR AND BECAUSE
HE WAS ITALIAN THEY BECAME KNOWN
AS SPAGHETTI WESTERNS EVEN
THOUGH MOST OF THEM WERE SHOT IN
IN SPAIN.
>> HIS BIG MISTAKE I THINK WAS
GETTING BORN.
>> SERGIO LYON TOOK THE SYNTAX
OF THE WESTERN GUN FIGHTS, THE
EMPTY STREETS.
>> GET THREE COFFINS READY AND
RAISED IT UP NOT SURFACE AND
DROPPED OUT EVERYTHING ELSE.
>> THERE WAS NO CULTURE, THERE
WAS NO SOCIETY.
THERE WAS NO MORES.
YOU KNOW, IT WAS MINIMALIST.
>> MY MISTAKE.
>> AND CLINT EASTWOOD FIT
PERFECTLY INTO THAT.
HE WAS THE MAN WITH NO NAME.
>> ACCORDING TO THE POWERS
VESTED IN US.
>> THE WESTERN’S FOREVER CHANGED
WITH THE SOUND TRACKS.
HIS APPROACH TO USING MUSIC TO
KIND OF PUNCTUATE THE THEME AND
TONE OF THE FILM.
>> HE HAD DONE HIS SCORE BEFORE
THEY SHOT THE MOVIE AND SO IN
THE GRAVEYARD SEQUENCE AT THE
END OF "THE GOOD, THE BAD AND
THE UGLY" ON THE DAY THEY CAN
HEAR THE SCORE THAT WE AS AN
AUDIENCE ARE HEARING.
IF YOU DID THAT JUST SILENT, I
THINK ACTORS WOULD START TO
WONDER WHAT’S HAPPENING.
WHEN YOU PLAY THE MARCONI MUSIC,
NOW YOU’RE IN AN OPERA AND IT
CHANGES THEIR PERFORMANCES.
>> MARCONI’S MUSIC AND THE USE
OF CLOSE‐UPS COMBINED TO REALLY
PUNCTUATE EMOTION AND THINKING.
AND THE CLOSE‐UPS GET CLOSER AND
CLOSER AND CLOSER TO THE ACTS’
FACES TILL YOU JUST SEE THEIR
EYES AND IT STARTS TO MOVE MORE
FRENETICALLY AS WHERE’S THE
GOLD, WHO IS GOING TO SHOOT
FIRST?
>> OKAY.
OPEN UP IN THERE.
>> BUTCH, YOU KNOW THAT IF IT
WERE MY MONEY, THERE IS NOBODY
THAT I WOULD RATHER HAVE STEAL
IT THAN YOU.
>> BUTCH CASSIDY AND THE
SUNDANCE KID IS A COUNTER
CULTURE WESTERN.
THERE’S NEVER A MOMENT WHEN
YOU’RE NOT ROOTING FOR THE BAD
GUYS IN THIS MOVIE.
>> IT HIT A NERVE I THINK,
UNEXPECTEDLY.
IT HIT SOME KIND OF NERVE THAT
HAD TO DO WITH OUTLAWS AND THE
OUTLAW SENSIBILITY.
>> THINK THERE’S ENOUGH DYNAMITE
THERE, BUTCH.
>> IT’S HARD TO FIND A FILM AS
FUN AND FUNNY AND WRY AND
CLEVER.
NEWMAN AND REDFORD WERE THE
PERFECT COUPLE.
>> I THINK WE LOST THEM.
DO YOU THINK WE LOST THEM?
>> NO.
>> NEITHER DO I.
>> PAUL AND I HAD TO CONNECT AS
CHARACTERS.
SO WE SPENT A LOT OF TIME
TOGETHER AND THE MORE TIME WE
SPENT TOGETHER, THE FONDER WE
BECAME OF EACH OTHER.
AND HE AND I BECAME REALLY GOOD
FRIENDS.
>> WE’RE DONE.
HE’S DEAD.
YOU’RE WELCOME TO STAY.
>> LISTEN, I DON’T MEAN TO BE A
SORE LOSER BUT IF I’M DEAD, KILL
HIM.
>> LOVE TO.
>> REDFORD’S SUPPOSED TO BE THE
FASTEST GUN IN ALL THE WEST AND
NEWMAN IS A VERY FUNNY SAR DONIC
LEADER OF THE GANG, BUTCH
CASSIDY.
>> NO, NOT YET.
NOT TILL ME AND HARLEY GET THE
RULES STRAIGHTENED OUT.
>> RULES?
IN A KNIFE FIGHT?
NO RULES.
>> IF THERE AIN’T GOING TO BE
ANY RULES, SOMEONE GET THE FIGHT
STARTED.
COUNT ONE TWO, THREE, GO.
>> ONE, TWO, THREE, GO.
>> IT’S A RELATIONSHIP MOVIE AND
BEST DEFINED IN THAT MOVIE WHERE
THEY’RE BEING CHASED.
THERE’S NOWHERE TO GO.
THEY’RE ON THE EDGE OF A CLIFF
AND THERE’S A RAGING RIVER
BELOW.
IT’S SO CLEAR THAT THE ODDS OF
THEM SURVIVING ARE PRETTY MUCH
NONE.
>> I’LL JUMP FIRST.
>> NO.
>> YOU JUMP FIRST.
>> NO, I SAID.
>> WHAT’S THE MATTER WITH YOU?
>> I CAN’T SWIM.
>> IT’S A GREAT DYNAMIC.
>> ARE YOU CRAZY?
THE FALL WILL PROBABLY KILL YOU.
>> THE MOVIE JUST WORKS.
>> AND WESTERNS WILL STAY AROUND
DESPITE LEAN TIMES BECAUSE
THEY’RE SO CENTRAL TO OUR IDEA
OF WHAT THE COUNTRY IS.
IN ONE WESTERN AFTER ANOTHER,
THESE HUMAN FIGURES ARE PLACED
ON THIS VAST CANVAS.
AND IN THAT GENRE, YOU CAN TELL
ANY KIND OF STORY YOU WANT.
IT IS A VESSEL INTO WHICH YOU
CAN PUT ANYTHING.
>> AND HARPER LEE’S BOOK "TO
KILL A MOCKINGBIRD" CAME AT A
TIME WHEN PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY
NEEDED TO READ THAT OKAY.
>> ATTICUS, YOU HEARD ABOUT TOM
ROBINSON.
>> YES, SIR.
>> GRAND JURY WILL GET AROUND TO
CHARGING HIM TOMORROW.
>> "TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD" IS
REALLY A FASCINATING STORY.
YOU SEE AMERICA SORT OF
GRAPPLING WITH ITSELF HOW TO
APPROACH ISSUES OF THE CIVIL
RIGHTS STRUGGLE.
>> I GET ASIDE FROM THAT DOOR,
MR. FINCH.
>> ATTICUS FINCH IS A LAWYER WHO
GOES AGAINST THE GRAIN OF HIS
COMMUNITY TO SAY THAT A BLACK
GUY IS BEING WRONGLY HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR SOMETHING THAT
HE DID NOT DO.
>> TOM, DID YOU RAPE HER?
>> I DID NOT, SIR.
>> THE FILM MAKES ATTICUS FINCH
INTO A HERO.
IT’S TOLD THROUGH THE EYES OF
HIS YOUNG DAUGHTER.
>> YOU NEVER REALLY UNDERSTAND A
PERSON UNTIL YOU CONSIDER THINGS
FROM HIS POINT OF VIEW.
>> TO KILL A"TO KILL A MOCKINGBI
TOUCHING FATHER/DAUGHTER STORY
AND WE DON’T HAVE MANY OF THOSE.
>> THERE’S BEEN SOME HARD TALK
AROUND TOWN TO THE EFFECT THAT I
SHOULDN’T DO MUCH ABOUT
DEFENDING THIS MAN.
>> HER FATHER IS SHOWING SCOUT
WHAT A GOOD GUY LOOKS LIKE.
>> IF YOU SHOULDN’T BE DEFENDING
HIM, THEN WHY ARE YOU DOING IT.
>> GREGORY PECK’S ATTICUS FINCH
REALLY DOES HELP AMERICA SORT OF
COME INTO THE DISCOURSE OF THE
CIVIL RIGHTS STRUGGLE.
>> IN OUR COURTS, ALL MEN ARE
CREATED EQUAL.
>> THE REALITY IS, ATTICUS FINCH
WAS A FANTASY.
PARTICULARLY AT THAT TIME WHEN
HISTORY OFFERS US A NUMBER OF
CONSISTENTLY OPPOSITE EXAMPLES.
>> I DIDN’T MAKE ANY RULES.
>> BUT YOU SURELY.
>> EVERYBODY LIVES BY THEM.
EVERYBODY’S STUCK WITH WHAT HE
IS.
EVEN THEM SWAMP ANIMALS.
>> EVEN THAT WEASEL.
>> YOU CALLING ME A WIESEL?
>> NO, I’M CALLING YOU A WHITE
MAN.
>> SIDNEY POITIER WOULD OFTEN BE
CAST IN BLATANT SORT OF MESSAGE
MOVIES OF THAT ERA.
THERE ARE SOME EXCEPTIONS LIKE A
RAISINEN IN THE SUN.
>> I’M THINKING I’M 35 YEARS
OLD, I’M MARRIED 11 YEARS AND I
GOT A BOYS WHO GOT TO SLEEP IN
THE LICHING ROOM.
>> RAISIN IN THE SUN WAS ABOUT
INTEGRATION.
THEY BUY A HOUSE IN A NICE WHITE
AREA BU BUT THE PEOPLE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD DON’T WANT THEM
THERE.
>> OUR ASSOCIATION IS PREPARED
TO BUY THE HOUSE FROM YOU AT A
FINANCIAL GAIN TO YOUR FAMILY.
>> LORD HAVE MERCY.
>> POITIER GETS TO SHOW MORE
RANGE IN "RAISIN IN THE SUN."
>> YOU MIND HOW I FEEL.
YOU GET OUT OF HERE.
>> HE’S ANGRY AT THE SYSTEM, AT
WHITE SUPREMACY, ANGRY AT THE
LACK OF ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY FOR
BLACK AMERICANS.
>> ALL I WANT TO IS TO BE ABLE
TO STAND IN FRONT OF MY BOY LIKE
MY FATHER NEVER WAS ABLE TO DO
TO ME AND TELL HIM THAT HE WILL
BE SOMEBODY IN THIS WORLD
BESIDES A SERVANT AND A
CHAUFFEUR.
HUH?
>> THESE WERE NOT STEREOTYPICAL
BLACK CHARACTERS, MAGICAL NEGROS
OR GOOD NEGRO WHO WERE THERE TO
DEMONSTRATE THE ULTIMATE GOOD OF
MAINSTREAM WHITE SOCIETY.
HE’S PLAYING A WELL ROUNDED
THREE DIMENSIONAL CHARACTER AND
I THINK HE JUST BUILDS ON IT
FROM THERE.
>> I’M A BAPTIST.
I DON’T GO TO MASS.
>> WE GO.
>> HOW DID YOU GET THERE BEFORE
I CAME ALONG.
>> WE WALK TREY SUNDAY NOW WE
GO, TOO.
>> WITH LILIES IN THE FIELD, HE
BECOMES THE SECOND
AFRICAN‐AMERICAN TO WIN AN
ACADEMY AWARD.
FIRST TO WIN IN THE BEST ACTOR
CATEGORY.
>> SIDNEY POITIER.
>> MR. POITIER IS THE FIRST
NEGRO TO WIN SUCH A HIGH AWARD
AND THE ANNOUNCEMENT IS RECEIVED
WARMLY BY THE AUDIENCE.
>> IT IS A LONG JOURNEY TO THIS
MOMENT.
>> SIDNEY POITIER HAS THIS RISE
IN THE LATE ’60s WHERE HE’S NOT
JUST A BLACK ACTOR.
HE WAS THE BIGGEST ACTOR IN
HOLLYWOOD.
>> MOM, THIS IS JOHN.
>> GUESSES WHO COMING TO DINNER
WAS A HUGE HIT IN 1967.
THAT STARS SPENCER TRACY AND
KATHRYN HEPBURN IN THE LAST OF
THEIR FILMS TOGETHER.
AND IT WAS ABOUT AN INTERRACIAL
RELATIONSHIP.
>> AS FOR YOU TWO AND THE
PROBLEMS YOU’RE GOING TO HAVE,
THEY SEEM ALMOST UNIMAGINABLE.
BUT YOU’LL HAVE NO PROBLEM WITH
ME.
>> THE YEAR SIDNEY WAS THE
NUMBER ONE BOX OFFICE STAR I SAW
ALL THREE MOVIES, GUESSES WHO
COME TO DINNER, IN THE HEAT OF
THE NIGHT.
>> YOU KNOW WHAT THAT MEANS?
>> HE >> PROBABLY GOT HIM
KILLED.
>> THAT’S WHAT HE SHE THINKS.
SHE WANTS TO US CATCH HER
KILLER.
>> IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT HE
PLAYED A DETECTIVE WHO COMES
FROM THE NORTH TO THE SOUTH AND
HAS TO SOLVE A CRIME ALONG WITH
A RACIST SHERIFF PLAYED BY ROD
STEIGER.
AND IT WAS BEING DRAMATIZED ON A
FLIP, IT’S ACTUALLY HAPPENING IN
AMERICA.
>> VERGEAL IS A FUNNY NAME FOR A
BOY THAT COMES FROM
PHILADELPHIA.
WHAT DO THEY CALL YOU UP THERE?
>> THEY CALL ME MR. TIBS.
>> THERE’S ONE MOMENT IN THE
FILM WHEN HE HAS A
CONFRONTATIONING WITH AN
IMPORTANT WHITE LAND OWNER.
>> YOU TWO CAME HERE TO QUESTION
HE?
>> AND THE WHITELAND OWNER
PLAYED BY LARRY GATES DOES THE O
DOES NOT LIKE THE WAY POITIER’S
CHARACTER IS TALKING TO HIM.
>> WAS MR. COBERT EVER IN THIS
GREEN HAASE SAY LAST NIGHT ABOUT
MIDNIGHT.
>> SO HE SLAPS POITIER AND
POITIER SLAPS HIM BACK.
SO QUICKLY.
>> THE SLACKBACK WAS NOT IN THE
SCRIPT AND POITIER SAID UNLESS I
GET TO RETURN THE SLAP, I’M NOT
MAKING THIS FILM.
>> THIS WAS LEGENDARY.
YOU SAW A BLACK MAN PUT HANDS ON
A WHITE MAN AND HE DOESN’T GET
KILLED.
HE DOESN’T GO TO JAIL.
THERE’S NO REPERCUSSIONS.
THAT SCENE TO ME WAS ONE OF THE
MOST EMPOWERED SCENES IN THE
HISTORY OF HOLLYWOOD.
♪ IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT ♪
>> THEY’RE COMING TO GET YOU,
BARBARA.
>> GEORGE ROMERO DOESN’T GET
ENOUGH CREDIT FOR "NIGHT OF THE
LIVING DEAD" BECAUSE NOT ONLY
DID HE CHANGE THE FACE OF ZOMBIE
MOVIES BUT HE ALSO CHANGED THE
FACE OF INDEPENDENT CINEMA.
>> LOOK AT WHAT GEORGE ROMERO
WAS DOING WITH THIS FILM.
HE WAS TACKLING THE CULTURAL
TENSIONS OF THE TIME, THE
HYSTERIA GOING ON IN THE MOMENT.
>> MASS HYSTERIA, WHAT DO THEY
THINK WE’RE IMAGINING ALL THIS.
>> SHUT UP.
>> THERE’S NO ACTORS YOU
RECOGNIZE.
IT FEES KIND OF LIKE A
DOCUMENTARY.
IT KIND OF FELT LIKE NEWS REEL
FOOTAGE OF VIETNAM.
IT WAS TERRIFYING.
>> MEDICAL AUTHORITIES IN
CUMBERLAND HAVE CONCLUDED IN ALL
CASES THE KILLERS ARE EATING THE
FLESH OF THE PEOPLE THEY MURDER.
>> PEOPLE ALWAYS WANT TO BE
SCARED.
EARLY ON YOU DO THAT WITH
MONSTERS.
BUT YOU START TO GET THE SHIFT
WHEN THE MONSTERS BECOME US.
IT’S REGULAR PEOPLE.
AND THAT’S ALWAYS FAR MORE
FRIGHTENING.
>> PERFECT TIMING.
COME ON IN.
>> IN ROSEMARY’S BABY,’S NOT AN
IMPOSSIBLE SITUATION.
>> HE’S ROMAN, OKAY.
>> IT’S YOUR HOME, IT’S YOUR
HUSBAND, IT’S YOUR LIFE WITH
NEIGHBORS WHO SEEM NICE AND
FRIENDLY IN THE BEGINNING.
IT ALL SEEMS OKAY, BUT IT’S
REALLY NOT.
>> THAT VERY SIMPLE PREMISE OF
WHAT IF THE PEOPLE THAT YOU
INVESTED YOUR LIFE IN WERE LYING
TO YOU?
THAT IS A REALLY, REALLY SCARY
PREMISE.
>> I DREAMED SOMEONE WAS RAPING
ME.
SOMEONE INHUMAN.
>> ROSEMARY’S BABY IS A MOVIE
ABOUT PARANOIA WHERE IT ALL
TURNS OUT TO BE TRUE.
IT WAS TERRIFYING AND I WOULD
SIT THERE FROZEN BECAUSE
EVERYTHING IS SO UNDERPLAYED.
>> QUIETLY, ROSEMARY.
DON’T ARGUE OR MAKE A SCENE.
>> IT’S NOT TILL DEEP IN THE
MOVIE WHEN YOU REALIZE THAT HER
HUSBAND HAS NOT JUST SOLD HIS
SOLE TO THE DEVIL BUT HERS, AS
WELL.
>> SPOEGS YOU HAD THE BABY AND
YOU LOST IT.
WOULDN’T THAT BE THE SAME?
WE’RE GETTING SO MUCH.
RETURN.
>> IN A SORT OF WISE MOMENT, THE
FILM DOESN’T SHOW THE BABY.
WHAT YOU SEE IS MIA FARROW’S
REACTION TO SEEING THE BABY.
AND THAT’S EVEN WORSE BECAUSE
THEN YOU FILL IN YOUR OWN GAPS
ON WHAT THIS CHILD MUST LOOK
LIKE, THIS CHILD THAT’S BEEN
FATHERED BY SATAN ITSELF.
>> WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO IT?
WHAT HAVE YOU DONE TO ITS EYES.
>> HE HAS HIS FATHER’S EYES.
>> THAT’S THAT SORT OF THE POWER
OF SUGGESTION THAT REALLY MAKES
THAT MOVIE AS UNCOMFORTABLE AS
IT IS.
>> 300 LIGHT YEARS FROM YOUR
PRECIOUS PLANET.
>> YOUR LOVED ONES ARE DEAD AND
FORGOTTEN FOR 20 CENTURIES.
20 CENTURIES.
>> PLANET OF THE APES DOES WHAT
THE BEST OF SCI‐FI DOES.
IT IS THRILLING.
THERE IS ACTION.
THERE IS DRAMA, BUT IT’S ABOUT
SOMETHING FAR MORE SERIOUS.
UNDERNEATH IT, IT’S AN AL GOER
ABOUT RACISM ABOUT, INTOLERANCE,
ABOUT PEOPLE IMPOSING THEIR WILL
ON OTHERS IN UNNECESSARY AND
CRUEL WAYS.
>> OH, MY GOD.
I’M BACK.
I’M HOME.
>> PEOPLE DIDN’T KNOW THE ENDING
OF THE ME OF WHEN THEY WALKED
INTO THE THEATER.
THAT WAS A GENUINE SURPRISE.
>> YOU MANIACS!
YOU BLEW IT UP!
OH, DAMN YOU!
>> WOW.
I MEAN, IT WAS A REAL SHOCK.
>> AND THAT WILL STAY WITH ME
FOREVER.
♪
>> 2001 WAS A MASTERPIECE AND I
DON’T OFTEN THROW THAT ONE
AROUND, BUT IT WAS MAGNIFICENT
IN EVERY SHAPE AND FORM.
I’VE SEEN IT NOW 19 TIMES.
IT’S LONG BUT MAJESTIC.
♪
>> 2001 HAD THE GREATEST TIME
CUT IN THE HISTORY OF TIME CUTS
IN WHICH THE ENTIRE HISTORY OF
HUMANKIND IS COMMUNICATED IN THE
FIRST WEAPON BEING THROWN UP
INTO A BLUE SKY AND SUDDENLY
BECOMES A SPACECRAFT ORBITING
THE EARTH.
>> THERE’S NOT A SINGLE ACT IN A
KUBRICK FILM.
EVERYTHING IS WORKED OUT ALMOST
AS IF AN INDIVIDUAL IMAGE HAD A
WHOLE LIBRARY OF RESEARCH BEHIND
IT.
>> THE 9,000 SERIES IS THE MOST
RELIABLE COMPUTER EVER MADE.
>> 2001 WAS A HARD‐CORE
CONVERSATION FROM THE VERY FIRST
TIME ABOUT A COMPUTER BEING
SMARTER THAN WE ARE.
THAT’S WHAT WAS SO BRILLIANT
ABOUT IT.
>> OPEN THE POD BAY DOORS, HAL.
>> I’M SORRY, DAVE.
I’M AFRAID I CAN’T DO THAT.
>> IT’S ELUSIVE.
IT’S MORE LIKE MAGIC THAN A
MOVIE, MORE OF A POTION THAN A
MOVIE.
>> I JUST REMEMBER THAT ARE STAR
GATE MOMENT YOU COULD CALL IT A
PSYCHEDELIC SPECIAL EFFECT FOR
THE PSYCH DEL HIK GENERATION.
KUBRICK KNEW EXACTLY WHAT HE WAS
TELLING HIS STORY FOR.
♪
>> THE THING THAT’S MOST
IMPRESSIVE ABOUT IT IS THE FACT
THAT FINALLY YOU CAN’T EXPLAIN
IT.
WHAT HE SHOWED IS INTENTIONALLY
BEYOND RATIONAL EXPLANATION.
I THINK THAT’S THE POINT OF THE
FILM, THAT THING HAPPEN THAT ARE
BEYOND OUR HUMAN CAPACITY TO
EXPLAIN.
AND IT’S A REMARKABLE
ACHIEVEMENT.
♪
>> THERE WERE MORE STARS THAN ON
THE SIDEWALKS OF HOLLYWOOD
BOULEVARD.
IT WAS THE FILMLAND’S EVENING OF
GLIRTS AND GLAMOUR.
VIRGINIA WOOLF AS YOU KNOW IS
NOT A CHILDREN’S STORY BUT A
VERY CONTROVERSIAL PLAY BY ID
WARD ALBEE, NOW TRANSFORMED INTO
A FILM OF THE SAME NATURE WITH
ELIZABETH TAYLOR AND RICHARD
BURTON.
>> FILM MAKING IN THE SECOND
HALF OF THE SIMMS WAS VERY, VERY
IMPORTANT TO WHAT WE SAW IN THE
’70s.
>> WHAT A DUMP.
>> THERE WAS A NEW HOLLYWOOD, A
NEW WAVE OF FILMMAKERS AND THEY
PUT MUCH MORE MATURE THINGS ON
THE SCREEN AND YOU HAD THE
BEGINNINGS OF THAT PARTICULARLY
WITHES WHO AFRAID OF VIRGINIA
WOOLF.
>> LOOK SWEETHEART I CAN DRINK
YOU UNDER ANY GOD DAMN TABLE YOU
WANT.
>> THERE ISN’T ABOMINATON AWARD
THAT YOU HAVEN’T WON.
>> I SWEAR IF YOU EXISTED I
WOULD DIVORCE.
>> YOU THEIR ROMANCE, THEY
ENJOYED OR ENDURED OR HOWEVER
YOU WANT TO PHRASE IT IS SO
THELY PROJECTED ON TO THIS FILM.
>> STOP IT, MARTHA.
>> LIKE HELL I WILL.
YOU SEE GEORGE DIDN’T HAVE MUCH
PUSH.
HE WASN’T PARTICULARLY
AGGRESSIVE.
IN FACT, HE WAS SORT OF A FLOP.
>> YOU CANNOT WATCH THIS FILM
WITHOUT WONDERING HOW MUCH OF
THIS IS TRUE.
HOW MUCH OF THIS IS THEM NOT
ACTING.
AND JUST WORKING OUT YOU KNOW
THE ANGST OF THEIR NOTORIOUSLY
TUMULTUOUS RELATIONSHIP.
>> IS IN WILL ANY, NOT THAT I
WANT TROUBLE IN THE BURTON
HOUSEHOLD.
>> THERE’S ENOUGH AS IT IS.
>> STICK AROUND.
>> FROM MIKE NICHOLS ON HIS
FIRST FILM TO TAKE TWO OF THE
BIGGEST MOVIE STARS IN THE WORLD
AND SHOOT THEM IN THIS BLACK AND
WHITE RAW SAVAGE WAY, I THINK IT
WAS KIND OF A STROKE OF GENIUS.
>> FINALLY SNAPPED.
>> AND I’M GOING TO HAUL IT OUT
AND I’M NOT GOING TO GIN A DAMN
WHAT I DO AND I’M GOING TO MAKE
THE BIGGEST GOD DAMN, MOTION
YOU’VE HEARD.
>>S WHO AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF
USED LANGUAGE THAT HAD NEVER
BEEN HEARD IN A MOVIE.
"LIFE" MAGAZINE DID A STORY HOW
DARING VIRGINIA WOOLF WAS.
THAT WAS 1966.
RIGHT AROUND THAT TIME YOU BEGAN
TO SEE MORE OF THESE KINDS OF
MOVIES BEING MADE AND THEN THE
DAM STARTED BREAKING OPEN.
>> LEFT.
>> BONNIE AND CLYDE WAS PRODUCED
BY WARREN BEATTY.
BASED ON THE ESCAPADES OF
GANGSTERS FROM THE 1930s.
>> ONE TIME I TOLD YOU I WAS
GOING TO MAKE YOU SOMEBODY.
THAT’S WHAT YOU DONE FOR ME.
YOU MADE ME SOMEBODY THEY’RE
GOING TO REMEMBER.
>> BEATTY WAS EXTREMELY
AMBITIOUS AND VERY SPECTACULAR
THE.
HE WANTED TO WORK WITH THE BEST
DIRECTORS IN HOLLYWOOD AND HE
WAS ALREADY INFLUENCED BY THE
FRESH NEW WAVE IN EUROPEAN
FILMS.
>> I THINK ONE OF HIS INFLUENCES
WAS THE FEATURE THAT GODAR MADE
A BREAK‐THROUGH WITH BREATHLESS
WHICH IS ABOUT A CRIMINAL, A
DESPERADO ON THE RUN 0 BUT WHO
WE REALLY EMPATHIZED WITH AS
VIEWERS.
>> DOWN IN DUNCANVILLE LAST
YEAR, POOR FARMERS KEPT YOU AWAY
FROM US WITH SHOTGUNS.
YOU’RE SUPPOSED TO BE PROTECTING
YOU FROM HUSBAND AND.
>> EVERYBODY GOING IN PROBABLY
KNEW THAT IT ENDED WITH A
SHOOT‐OUT BUT THEY WERE NOT
SPECCING IT TO END WITH A
VIOLENT HEAVY THUDDING MACHINE
GUNNING MOMENT.
>> HEY.
>> THE MOVIE LETS YOU LOVE
BONNIE AND CLYDE.
>> AND THEN WATCH THEM GET
DESTROYED.
>> THE FRENCH HAVE BEEN HAVING
DEEP DARK THOUGHTS ABOUT THE
SOCIAL LOGICAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FILM AND ITS
SUCCESS.
GENERALLY, THEY ARE NOT VERY
INTERESTED IN WHAT IT TELLS
ABOUT THE 1930s.
RATHER THEY CALL IT A REFLECTION
OF THE HORROR, THE VIOLENCE, THE
EMPTINESS OF THE AMERICAN SOUL
TODAY.
>>.
♪ HELLO DARKNESS MY HOLD
FRIEND ♪
>> OF ALL THESE KINDS OF MOVIES
THAT WERE BEGINNING TO BREAK
THROUGH THE SYSTEM, THE
GRADUATE" BECAME THE MOVIE FOR A
GENERATION.
>> MRS. ROBINSON, YOU’RE TRYING
TO SEDUCE ME.
>> AREN’T YOU?
>> WELL, NO, I HADN’T THOUGHT OF
IT.
>> IT’S REALLY ABOUT A YOUNG
PERSON FEELING FULL OF MORAL
CONFUSION.
>> OH, GOD.
>> AND UTTERLY AT ODDS WITH
EVERYTHING THEY’RE EXPECTED TO
ENGAGE WITH.
>> I JUST WANT TO SAY ONE WORD
TO YOU.
ONE WORD.
>> YES, SIR.
>> ARE YOU LISTENING?
>> YES, I AM.
>> PLAQUES.
>> THE GRADUATE" WAS THE
BEGINNING OF MY EDUCATION.
I LITERALLY BEGAN TAKING NOTES,
CUTTING STYLES, PATTERNS,
COMPOSITION, I COULD UNDERSTAND
THE HAND OF THE DIRECTOR.
MIKE NICHOLS JUST HAD COMMAND OF
SO MANY DIFFERENT TONES AND
GENRES.
♪
>> MIKE NICHOLS SAID I’M GOING
TO CHOOSE THE MUSIC SIMON AND
GAR FUNKAL.
I’M GOING TO CHOOSE ONE ARTIST
AND THAT’S GOING TO BE THE SOUL
OF THE WHOLE MOVIE.
>> MRS. ROBINSON WAS MADE UP ON
THE SPOT.
I WAS SINGING.
♪ GOD BLESS YOU PLEASE
MRS. ROOSEVELT HEAVEN HOLDSES A
PLACE FOR THOSE PRAY ♪
>> IT WAS MRS. ROOSEVELT AND
SAID WE COULD.
>> FOR THE REST OF YOUR LIFE YOU
CAN HEAR SIMON AND GARFUNKEL AND
IT TAKES YOU BACK TO THE VIVID
SCENES IN THE GRADUATE.
>> HERE’S TO YOU MRS. ROBINSON,
JESUS LOVES YOU MORE THAN YOU
WILL KNOW, WHOA, WHOA.
>> WHEN YOU GET TO THE END OF
THE GRADUATE, WE’RE NOT GIVEN A
HAPPY ENDING.
>> ELAINE?
ELAINE.
>> YES, BEN GETS THE GIRL.
>> THEY HOP ON THE BUS TOGETHER.
BUT THEN THAT’S IT.
THEY DON’T EVEN KNOW WHAT TO DO
WITH EACH OTHER.
♪
♪ HELLO DARKNESSMIDE OLD
FRIEND ♪
>> IT’S ONE OF THE MOST PROFOUND
MOMENTS IN CINEMA HISTORY.
♪ TALK WITH YOU AGAIN ♪
>> TO SEE THE SMILES IS SLOWLY
FADE AND IT’S JUST THIS
EXISTENTIAL MOMENT OF LIKE, NOW
WHAT?
♪ LEFT ITS SEEDS WHILE I WAS
SLEEPING ♪
>> THERE ARE NO EASY ANSWERS IN
IT.
PEOPLE CAN RELATE TO THE MOVIE
BUT THEY CAN ALSO RELATE TO THE
FRUSTRATION AND THE UNCERTAINTY
OF WHAT THE MAIN CHARACTERS ARE
GOING THROUGH AT THE END AND IN
60s AMERICA WE WERE ALL IN THE
SAME BOAT WITH AN UNKNOWN
FUTURE.
♪ WITHIN THE SOUND OF SILENCE ♪.
♪
>> THE AMERICAN MOTION PICTURE
INDUSTRY IS IN THE THROES OF A
BLOODLESS REVOLUTION.
MOST OF THE SOUND STAGES ARE
DARK AND THE TALK IS ABOUT
RETRENCHMENT AND CUT BACK.
>> BY THE LATE ’60s, STUDIOS
WERE IN A LOT OF FINANCIAL PAIN.
THIS WAS THE PERIOD WHERE
WESTERN WERE PARAMOUNT.
TRANSAMERICA BOUGHT UNITED
ARTISTS.
>> THESE LARGER COMPANIES DIDN’T
KNOW HOW TO RUN A MOVIE COMPANY.
SO WHAT DID THEY DO?
THEY TURN TO THE PRODUCERS
WORKING FOR THAT STUDIO SO THEY
COULD USE THEIR EXPERIENCE.
>> DID YOU GET A CHANCE TO
PRODUCE THE FILM?
>> THE MOVIE HAS CHANGED.
>> THAT’S ME.
THAT’S THE BASIC CHANGE.
THAT MEANS THAT I’M ABLE AS
PETER FONDA TO WALK INTO
SOMEBODY’S OFFICE, SIT DOWN, AND
SAY HERE’S THE STORY IN MY HEAD.
>> IF YOU THINK ABOUT THE
GENERATION, WE HAD OUR OWN
CLOTHES, OUR OWN MUSIC.
WE HAD OUR OWN BOOKS.
BUT WE DIDN’T HAVE OUR OWN
MOVIE.
AND THAT’S THE SLOT I WANTED TO
FILL.
♪
♪ GET YOUR MOTOR RUNNING ♪
>> CAME OUT IN THE SUM ORE ’69,
COULD NOT BE A MORE PERFECT TIME
CAPSULE, THE RESTLESSNESS.
FOR TRULY EXPRESSING YOURSELF.
WHAT BETTER WAY TO DO THAT THAN
TO GO ON A ROAD TRIP THAT IS
FUELLED BY THE MONEY YOU MADE
FROM A DRUG DEAL.
>> IT WAS LIKE, OH, GOD, YEAH
WE’RE GOING TO RIDE ACROSS JOHN
FORD’S WEST.
ONLY WE’RE GOING TO GO EAST.
WE’RE GOING TO EAST BECAUSE
WE’RE GOING TO GO TO FLORIDA AND
RETIRE.
>> YOU GOT A HELMET?
>> OH, OH I’VE GOT A HELMET.
OH, I GOT A BEAUTY.
>> THE MODEL WAS A ROGER CORRMAN
BIKE FILMS.
CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE.
>> WHAT IS IT YOU WANT TO DO?
>> WE WANT TO BE FREE TO RIDE
OUR MACHINES WITHOUT BEING
HASSLED BY THE MAN.
AND WE WANT TO GET LOADED.
>> WILD ANGELS WAS KNOWN AS THE
HIGHEST GROSSING LOW BUDGET
PICTURE EVER MADE.
THAT RECORD WAS BROKEN VERY
QUICKLY BY "EASY RIDER."
♪
>> WE USE ALL THESE GREAT SONGS.
"BORN TO BE WILD," JUST SOME OF
THE GREAT SONGS EVER WRITTEN.
ONE OF THE APPEALS OF "EASY
RIDER" WAS THAT YOUNG PEOPLE,
HIPPIES, COLLEGE STUDENTS, DRAFT
RESISTORS COULD SEE THEMSELVES
ON THE SCREEN.
>> WE REPRESENT THEM, MAN,
SOMEBODY NEEDS A HAIRCUT.
WHAT YOU REPRESENT TO THEM IS
FREEDOM.
>> IN "EASY RIDER," THESE GUYS
ARE TRYING TO BREAK IT OOF THE
SYSTEM BUT NOT QUITE BEING ABLE
TO DO IT.
>> DON’T EVER TELL ANYBODY THAT
THEY’RE NOT FREE BECAUSE THEN
THEY GONE GET REAL BUSY KILLING
AND MAIMING TO PROVE TO YOU THAT
THEY ARE.
>> SO, IT BECOMES A DARK
STATEMENT ABOUT AMERICA.
>> IT TOOK DENNIS HOPPER AND
PETER FONDA TO KIND OF PAVE THE
WAY FOR PEOPLE LIKE US TO BE
ACCEPTED BY HOLLYWOOD.
WE WERE THE ENEMY.
WE WERE THE LONG HAIRS.
>> WITH THE NEW HOLLYWOOD
MOVIES, IT WASN’T JUST THAT THEY
WERE FUNNY OR SEXY OR EXCITING
OR DANGEROUS.
>> WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?
LAWRENCE OF NIGERIA?
>> IT WAS CLEARLY A
TRANSFORMATION IN CINEMA.
HOLLYWOOD HAD FINALLY CAUGHT UP
TO EUROPEAN POST‐WAR NEO‐REALISM
AND REALIZED THAT AMERICAN
AUDIENCES WERE READY FOR THIS
MORE SOPHISTICATED, MORE MATURE
KIND OF STORY TELLING.
>> LET’S GET ONE LIKE THIS.
>> THEY MAKE THE MOVIES?
>> YES, WE’RE MAKING A MOVIE.
"MIDNIGHT COWBOY."
>> AND WHO IS THAT?
>> BODY.
>> YOU’RE PRETTY.
I’LL SAY THAT.
>> AS THE NEW HOLLYWOOD IS
EMERGING, A BUNCH OF YOUNGER
MORE INDEPENDENT FILMMAKERS WANT
TO MAKE MOVIES ABOUT ADULT
THEMES.
AND "MIDNIGHT COWBOY" IS ONE OF
THOSE MOVIES.
>> THE CLIMATE IN AMERICA SEEMS
RIPE FOR A LITTLE MORE HONESTY.
IJ THEY’VE SAID ENOUGH BULL
SHIT.
>> I WANT TO BUY YOU A DRINK.
WHAT YOU THINK OF THAT?
>> "MIDNIGHT COWBOY" IS A LOVE
STORY BETWEEN TWO MEN, A
PLUTONIC LOVE AFFAIR BETWEEN TWO
GUYS WHO COULD NOT BE MORE
MISMATCHED IN HEIGHT, IN
BACKGROUND, IN OUTLOOK.
>> I’M WALKING HERE!
I’M WALKING HERE!
>> NOBODY EXPECTED IT TO MAKE A
DIME, BUT BECAUSE IT ATTRACTED
AN AUDIENCE, ESPECIALLY OF YOUNG
PEOPLE, IT WAS A HUGE HIT.
>> THIS WILL GO DOWN IN HISTORY
AS THE CINEMA SEASON WHICH
PROVED THAT CRIME DOESN’T PAY,
BUT THERE’S A FORTUNE IN
ADULTERY, INCEST, AND
HOMOSEXUALITY.
THIS IS NOT AN ACADEMY AWARDS,
IT’S A FREAK OUT, LADIES AND
GENTLEMEN.
>> NEW HOLLYWOOD AND OLD
HOLLYWOOD REALLY CLASHED AT THE
ACADEMY AWARDS IN 1970.
>> JOHN, I DIDN’T THINK YOU
WOULD SHOW.
>> NOBODY DEFINES STUDIO STAR
MAKING LIKE JOHN WAYNE, YET HE
NEVER WON AN OSCAR.
HERE HE IS NOMINATED FOR "TRUE
GRIT" UP AGAINST TWO GUYS REALLY
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NEW
HOLLYWOOD.
>> THERE’S A "LIFE" MAGAZINE
COVER STORY NEAR THAT TIME WITH
WAYNE AND DUSTIN HOFFMAN.
DIFFERENT WORLDS, DIFFERENT
HEROES, ONE SPEAKING TO OUR
ELDERS AND THE OTHER SPEAKING TO
A NEW GENERATION OF MOVIE GOERS.
>> THE WINNER IS JOHN WAYNE.
>> IN THE END, WAYNE WON.
>> I WOULD HAVE PUT THAT PATCH
ON 35 YEARS EARLIER.
>> AND THEN YOU COULDN’T IMAGINE
A MORE DELICIOUS MOMENT OF
CONFLICT THAN "MIDNIGHT COWBOY"
WINNING BEST PICTURE, ELIZABETH
TAYLOR ANNOUNCING IT.
>> THE WINNER IS "MIDNIGHT
COWBOY."
>> THE PRODUCER TOLD ME I’M NOT
SURE LIZ TAYLOR HAD EVEN HEARD
OF "MIDNIGHT COWBOY" WHEN SHE
OPENED THE ENVELOPE.
SHE WAS AS SHOCKED AS ANYONE.
OLD HOLLYWOOD, NEW HOLLYWOOD IN